# Third movement

### De Greiff, P. (2006). Justice and reparations. In Handbook of Reparations. Oxford University Press.

“While I have absolutely no interest in launching a critique of legal approaches to transitional problems, the juridical approach to reparations is problematic; it is so not because of its juridical nature per se, but because it is an understanding that has been developed, for good reasons, with an eye to the resolution of relatively isolated cases.1 By contrast, the aim of this chapter—and of this research project as a whole—is to think about what is fair, proper, and efficient in the resolution of massive and systematic cases of abuse.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 451)

“I argue instead in favor of thinking about justice in the context of massive cases in terms of the achievement of three goals, namely, recognition, civic trust and social solidarity” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 451)

“that there are two different contexts of use of the term ‘reparations’” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“The first context is the juridical one, particularly, the context of international law, in which the term is used in a wide sense to refer to all those measures that may be employed to redress the various types of harms that victims may have suffered as a consequence of certain crimes” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Restitution” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Compensation” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Rehabilitation” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Satisfaction and guarantees of nonrecurrence” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“The other context in which the term ‘reparations’ is frequently used is in the design of programs (i.e. more or less coordinated sets of reparative measures) with massive coverage” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“in a narrower sense. Here ‘reparations’ refers to the attempts to provide benefits directly to the victims of certain types of crimes. In this sense, programs of reparations do not take truth-telling, criminal justice, or institutional reform, for example, as parts of reparations.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“programs” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“two fundamental distinctions are between material and symbolic reparations” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“between the individual and the collective distribution” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Material reparations may assume the form of compensation, that is, of payments in either cash or negotiable instruments, or of service packages, which may in turn include provisions for education, health, and housing.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Symbolic reparations may include, for instance, official apologies, rehabilitation, the change of names of public spaces, the establishment of days of commemoration, the creation of museums and parks dedicated to the memory of victims, etc” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“the breadth of the legal understanding” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“restricted use of the term characteristic of discussions about the design of programs” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“I defend the use of the term ‘reparations’ in the narrower sense described above, that is, to refer to measures that provide benefits to victims directly” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Courts do not have an option but to consider each case in its own terms.5 By contrast, whoever is in charge of designing a massive program of reparations has to respond to a much wider and complex universe of victims, and has to employ, per force, methods and forms of reparation suitable to these circumstances.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 454)

“There are two fundamental reasons that justify thinking about reparations in relation to a broader political agenda rather than in terms of a narrowly conceived juridical approach” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 454)

“In general, it can be said that they agree on the following interpretation of ‘fair and adequate compensation’ and other cognate terms: the ideal behind reparations is ‘full restitution’ (restitutio in integrum), that is, the restoration of the status quo ante. In cases where this is impossible, for example, when a death has occurred, compensation is required, and this means, for the Inter-American Court, for instance, that material and moral damages are called for” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 455)

“But the fact that there is no transitional or postconflict reparations program that has managed to compensate victims in proportion to the harm they suffered, that the very quantification of these harms is problematic, and that even the idea that this should be attempted might generate unfulfillable expectations, are not the only problems that accompany the effort to import this criterion of justice to the domain of massive programs.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 457)

“In the case of massive abuse, however, an interest in justice calls for more than the attempt to redress the particular harms suffered by particular individuals. Whatever criterion of justice is defended must be one that has an eye also on the preconditions of reconstructing the rule of law, an aim that has a public, collective dimension.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 457)

“There are three specific aims, closely related to the notion of justice, but particularly salient during times of transition, that I think can help structure an answer to the question of what is fair in terms of reparations.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 459)

“One of the main aims of transitional justice is to return (or, in some cases to establish anew) the status of citizens to individuals.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“To the extent that a reparations program aims to contribute to the achievement of justice, and that recognition is both a condition and a consequence of justice, this links reparations and recognition. In order to recognize individuals as citizens it is necessary to recognize them as individuals first. That is to say, it is necessary to recognize them not only as members of groups (as important as this might be), but also as irreplaceable and unsubstitutable human beings.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“Truth-telling provides recognition in ways that are perfectly familiar, and which are still probably best articulated by the old difference proposed by Thomas Nagel between knowledge and” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“acknowledgment, when he argued that although truth commissions rarely disclose facts that were previously unknown, they still make an indispensable contribution in acknowledging these facts.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“In summary, reparations contribute to justice not only because they complement transitional justice measures generally, but because they do so in a particular way, namely by helping to keep those other measures from fading into irrelevance for most victims.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“Another legitimate aim of a program of reparations as an instrument of justice is the formation or the restoration of trust among citizens.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“Just like recognition, civic trust is at one and the same time a condition and a consequence of justice.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 462)

“Again, for victims, reparations constitute a manifestation of the seriousness of the state and of their fellow citizens in their efforts to reestablish relations of equality and respect.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 463)

“Former victims of abuse are given a material manifestation of the fact that they are now living among a group of fellow citizens and under institutions that aspire to be trustworthy.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“Just like civic trust, solidarity also comes in different types and degrees. Social solidarity is the type of empathy” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“And this implies having an interest in the interests of others.39 This is precisely what social solidarity is.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“Another advantage of thinking about reparations in explicitly political terms, rather than in terms of judicial considerations, is that it places another thorny issue in the design of reparations programs in its proper context. I am talking about the question of finances. A political perspective on reparations introduces some clarity in discussions about financing strategies. Basically, this happens because it takes the question of finances out of the exclusive domain of technicians and lawyers and returns it where it should properly lie, namely, in the domain of competing social priorities.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 466)

“Reparations programs should display what I call integrity or coherence, which I analyze into two different dimensions, internal and external.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“with criminal justice, truth-telling, and institutional reform.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“Reparations programs ought to display integrity or coherence in another dimension: a program of reparations, if it is to attain its proper goals, must always be a complex program that distributes different benefits, and the different components of the plan ought to be mutually coherent. That is, the program ought to be internally coherent. Most reparations programs distribute more than one kind of benefit. These may include symbolic as well as material reparations, and each of these categories may include different measures and be distributed individually or collectively.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“following scheme” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Symbolic Measures” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Service Packages” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Individual Grants” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 469)

“4. Development and Social Investment” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 469)

“Here it is worth distinguishing between reparations in their strict sense, and the reparative effects of other programs. Development, just like criminal justice, for example, may have reparative effects.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“That is to say, the program must be internally and externally coherent, and it must avoid reproducing and perpetuating unjust social structures. In the last analysis, a transitional government in a poor country will most likely propose a development plan, and ideally, the program of reparations must also cohere with that plan.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“It has insisted on the importance of individual reparations, allowing all the while that there are situations in which a collective dimension is perfectly proper.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“The three goals around which I have defined the requirements of justice for these cases require the exercise of political judgment, understood in the broad sense of a judgment about what is both in the common good and feasibly achievable.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“We do well, then, in asking ourselves seriously what justice in reparations requires.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 472)

“The history of European colonization and its impact on Indigenous Peoples from the American continent is well known. Genocide, massacres, disease, slavery and forced labour, looting and displacement, the kidnapping of women and children, imprisonment, policies of forced assimilation, and criminalization of protests and resistance “are deeply rooted in modern societies, and their effects continue to exist and determine the lives of Indigenous Peoples in many countries” (Stavenhagen, 2009: 64). Today, racism against Indigenous Peoples and the structural inequalities that affect them reveal the persistence of political exclusion patterns, social marginalization and cultural discrimination in Brazil and Canada. Despite this legacy of enduring historical injustice, they have resisted and struggled today for their right to truth, justice, reparation and the guarantee of non-repetition of violence in the present. In recent decades, the struggles of Indigenous Peoples for historical justice and reparation have gained visibility. Truth and Reconciliation Commissions have been established in several countries of the Americas, as necessary forums for processes of democratic transition and/or overcoming the violence and crimes of the past to promote reconciliation. In Guatemala, Peru, Paraguay, Canada, the United States of America, Colombia, Mexico, Chile and Brazil, the commissions have dealt with violence cases against Indigenous Peoples. The efforts to investigate these mechanisms and the general systematization and consolidation of the obtained data have allowed the evaluation of the size and seriousness of the acts of violence against Indigenous Peoples in the Americas.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3)

### Obuah, E. E. (2016). The Politics of Reparations: The Academic Epistemic Communities and the Implications of Reparation Debate on African-American and Africa’s Quest for Reparations. Open Journal of Political Science, 06(01), 44–52. <https://doi.org/10.4236/ojps.2016.61005>

“Following the activism of reparation, Verdun (1993) identified four stages/phases of the reparation movement, and Brooks (2004) has divided these activisms into three main periods: the slavery, the post-slavery, and the post-Holocaust periods.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“the post-Holocaust era has witnessed the reemergence and revivalization of the moral and legal arguments in favor and against reparations.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“Evidence of this growth and awareness on reparation debate, especially in the case of reparation to African-American descendants was the proliferation of reparation litigations in US courts.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“But the arguments for reparations to Africa are strong based on the fact that the slave trade led to the kidnapping of millions of Africans who were sold as slaves to the New World. Also during the periods of slave trade and colonialism, Africa’s economic, social and political life were dislocated and distorted.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“While the opponents of reparation acknowledge that African Americans have been systematically disadvantaged as a result of slavery and its aftermath, they argue that reparation presents a plethora of technical problems” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“the prohibitive cost of reparation, or the problems of determining who would represent African Americans and the legitimacy of such group” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“In broad terms, there are two epistemic communities, namely those opposed to reparation, and those in favor of reparations. Within the epistemic community favorable to reparations, there are first, those who favor the use of tort model hence referred to as activism and confrontationalism in their approach, and second, those who support reparation not from the narrow legalisms and monetary compensation which characterize most conventional debate but more significantly on how America can redeem its racial injuries by focusing the debate on atonement. And the third group consists of those who recognize the need for apology but are very skeptical and have no faith if the African Americans would ever be compensated for injuries incurred during slavery and Jim Crow period because of the herculean legal obstacles” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“The confrontational model is primarily characterized by demand for monetary payment from white to blacks” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“This model not only made a case for monetary compensation to African-Americans, but more significant, to Africa for enslavement of Africans during the trans-Atlantic slave trade and the massive exploitation of the African continent by European nations during the colonial period.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“Therefore, legal approaches ranging from individual law suits to collective class action suit are preferred modus operandi” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“According to Miller (2004) the conversational model is a way of re-characterizing acts or situations in ways that are morally or politically significant. It is a model which at a minimum makes it impossible for citizens to ignore the contributions of slavery and de jure segregation to the character of the American society.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 49)

“But by far the most ardent proponent of the atonement model is Brooks (2004) who tried persuasively to reframe the reparation debate from the tort-dominant model to a forward-looking model in which the United States Government must make sure the pangs and deaths of slaves have posthumous meaning by making reparation and apology believable by a tangible act of material realty. In trying to demonstrate and establish the connection between slavery and position of blacks in contemporary America, Brooks (2004: pp. 36-87) argued that there were evidence of capital deficiencies (social and human capital) linking past conditions of slavery and Jim Crow period to deficiencies among contemporary African American population.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 49)

“While the former was directed toward the individual victims or victims’ families, the latter was directed toward the victims’ group(s), designed for the benefit of the group and to nurture the group’s self-empowerment and aid in the social and cultural transformation of the nation.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“he atonement model while not eliminating the courts, prescribes a conversational and legislative approach by the communities involved in which redress/reparation is presented as a means of accounting for responsibilities as citizens to each other and acknowledging the responsibility” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“interest and support for Africa’s quest for reparation gathered momentum in the 1990s with the hosting of the First Pan-African Congress on Reparation in Abuja, Nigeria, the preparatory regional conference in 2001 in Dakar, and the UN World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001 in Durban, South Africa” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“that slave trade, particularly of Africa, was a unique tragedy in the history of humanity, crime against humanity which was unparalleled not only because of its abhorrent barbarism, but also in terms of its enormous magnitude, its institutionalized nature, its transnational dimension, and especially its negation of the essence of the human nature of the victims;” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“that the consequences of this tragedy, accentuated by those of colonialism and apartheid, have resulted in substantial and lasting economic, political and cultural damage to the African peoples and are still present in the form of damage caused to the descendants of the victims by the perpetuation of prejudice against Africans in the continent and peoples of African descent in the Diaspora” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“As articulated by Gifford (1993) this generation of scholarship is convinced that Africa has a compelling case for reparation for the slave trade and colonialism on the following grounds:  that the enslavement of Africans was a crime against humanity as defined by the Charter of Nuremberg Tribunal and the International Criminal Court;” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“The literature on reparation is rich and diverse as well as the academic communities.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 51)

## Very distant past violences reparation path

Neither justice nor human rights are given facts. The reality that recent acts of massive violence are remembered and investigated—and, furthermore, that they cross the threshold into the field of justice—are processes that must be explained. That claims for violence from more than half a century, a century, or even 150 years ago advance in their wake deserves more curious attention. It requires many questions. What makes it possible for the arm of justice to stretch through the portal of time? Why justice? How justice? Who demands it? Are memory and research not enough? Are there other political forms of reparation for such distant events?

There is a significant and growing body of academic research in law, history, anthropology, literature, and cultural studies that has exhaustively documented—with abundant argumentation—the massive crimes and spoliation suffered under colonialism, as well as the detrimental effects and benefits enjoyed in the present.

In 2013, the Caribbean countries (CARICOM) initiated a request for reparations for the genocide of native peoples and slavery, approving the Ten-Point Reparation Plan, which was embodied in various subsequent initiatives, such as the formation of a CARICOM Reparations Commission. In 2020, these proposals were presented to the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council as part of a “sustainable development” agenda and progress toward “a century of peace and justice.”

In 2021, the first CARICOM-Africa summit was held: it was decided to propose at the highest global level an agenda to fight racism, commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the 2001 UN World Conference against Racism, and jointly demand reparations at the United Nations. That same year, Barbados became a republic by removing Elizabeth II as Head of State after nearly four hundred years of British colonization, reviving claims for reparations. In March and April 2022, visits by heirs to the throne were met with protests and petitions for reparation in Belize, Jamaica, the Bahamas, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Antigua and Barbuda, and Saint Lucia.

In 2022, the then Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro created the Presidential Commission for Historical Truth, Justice, and Reparation for Colonial Rule and its Consequences in Venezuela. A similar request was made in 2022 by the Vice President of Colombia, Francia Márquez, to repair the crimes of slavery perpetrated by colonialist states against African and Afro-descendant populations over several centuries during the colonial era. In Mexico, marking five centuries since the fierce conquest of Tenochtitlan and the bicentennial of independence from Spain, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador formalized the return of three thousand hectares of land in Sonora to the Yaqui people and promised the restitution of another 20,000. Furthermore, he announced legal actions and infrastructure works—such as access to running and potable water—and offered an apology to these peoples for the marginalization, abuses, and injustices committed during the republican era.

In 2021, Canada celebrated its first “Day for Truth and Reconciliation” with marches and televised events across the country. This memory policy focused on the Indigenous victims of the hundred-plus residential schools—mostly managed by the Catholic Church—that operated between the late 19th century and the 1970s, which were part of a systematic policy of “cultural genocide” against Indigenous people. This initiative recognizes a path started in 2008 with the creation of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission which, after years of research and debate, made nearly one hundred recommendations for reparative policies.

“The core of their mission was to document the injustices and intergenerational traumas experienced by direct and indirect victims, beginning the process of healing the consequences of “cultural genocide”1, and seeking reconciliation” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3) “It also included 94 Calls to Action aimed at correcting the legacy of residential schools and assisting the reconciliation process.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 8)

“However, the events promoted by the TRC in Canada were not attended by the abusers.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 8)

“The National Truth Commission (CNV) in Brazil, created in 2012, aimed to investigate the crimes and human rights violations during the military dictatorship from 1946 to 1988. After a claim by the Indigenous Peoples themselves, the crimes committed against them were included in the CNV’s investigations.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3)

“Brazil’s transitional scenario finally consolidated through the institution of a CNV, led to the rediscovery of a series of documents proving that Indigenous Peoples were victims of the military dictatorship and probably the most important and least reported victims of that period, given the violence suffered during development projects implemented by military governments. Among the documents found, the publication of the so-called Figueiredo Report4 was fundamental for the CNV to realize that the conflict and persecution against Indigenous Peoples was a political issue and was due to a development model based on the expropriation and theft of indigenous lands.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 10) “Supposedly destroyed in a fire at the Ministry of Agriculture, the report was found by Marcelo Zelic almost intact at the Museum of the Indian in Rio de Janeiro in April 2013, with over preserved 7,000 pages (Zema & Zelic, 2020).” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 11)

“In addition to the Figueiredo Report, indigenous people made other accusations to the National Truth Commission group about the existence of concentration camps, torture centers, and illegal prisons for indigenous people during the military dictatorship.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 11)

“The CNV recognized the Brazilian State’s responsibility, by direct action or omission, for the expropriation of illegally occupied indigenous lands during the period under review and other severe violations of human rights against these populations, ending up recommending thirteen actions to the Brazilian State” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 12)

“Despite promises to transform colonial relations and the fact that both final reports ratified the Canadian and Brazilian states’ responsibility for the genocide of thousands of Indigenous Peoples, these truth commissions were not capable to satisfactorily address the past and to stop the continuity of structural violence affecting them.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 13)

“none of the Canadian apologies were assertive enough to transform the colonial relations with Indigenous Peoples. Despite the concrete ceremonial measures and widespread publicity, none of them morally involved the perpetrators, nor were felt with sincerity by the indigenous survivors.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 14)

“To make these symbolic gestures less empty, an apology must be combined with a systematic review of the past, to hold institutions and individuals directly involved in human rights violations accountable, and recognize self-determination, not to mention that any discussions or gestures of reconciliation must be preceded by real acts of restitution” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 14)

“The CNV was expected to provoke a more open public debate on the military dictatorship crimes in Brazil. However, this did not happen. Shortly after the final report’s publication with thirteen recommendations for reparations to Indigenous Peoples, they quickly fell into oblivion by the public authorities, and the matter also disappeared from the press. None of the thirteen recommendations were implemented by the Brazilian state” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 15)

“There is a kind of prohibition on the memory of crimes committed against Indigenous Peoples throughout history. This forbidden memory encourages the perpetuation or repetition of acts of violence and barbarity already observed in the past.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 15)

“Alejandro Castillejo-Cuéllar’s theoretical proposal for a Critical Studies of Transitions Program (2014, 2017) invites us to think “about the dialectics between the fractures and continuities” of the Brazilian and Canadian “transition scenarios” in order to understand how “these processes coexist with various forms of violence creating new sociabilities.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 4)

“The notion of “historical justice” employed here encompasses the four pillars of transitional justice: justice, truth, reparation, and the guarantee of non-repetition, but seeks to go further. Starting with the indigenous movements critiques on the “transitional justice” and the colonial way in which reconciliation has been carried out, we propose the notion of “historical justice” as a broader category for thinking the struggles of Indigenous Peoples for justice, truth, reparation, and the guarantee of non-repetition, drawing attention to their relationship with their historical struggle for the defense of territories and for social justice. It is a category that considers the denial of the right to history, truth, and memory to Indigenous Peoples as a usurpation of their right to self-determination and a denial of their own humanity. Finally, the notion of historical justice implies understanding the production of indigenous invisibility as a purposeful act with important political consequences.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 4)

“We highlight the “political dimension” (Garapon, 2008: 12) that Indigenous Peoples’ demands for reparation assume when they claim concrete and positive means to eliminate historical injustices’ traces.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5)

“Many truth commissions came with requests for forgiveness from authorities.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5) “The clarification of the truth and the search for justice are considered necessary steps towards reconciliation.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5)

“CastillejoCuéllar moves further from the technical-juridical arsenal and the legal language that predominate in the field of studies on transitional justice, without abandoning it, towards an anthropological perspective, proposing a critical look and a new form of reading to what he calls “transitional scenarios”” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5) ““transitional scenario” as a social and cultural phenomenon, a “liminal moment” in which “the promise of a new society” emerges through the multiple forms and mechanisms that the “social imagination of the future” assume” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 6)… pero no hay algo parecido en Argentina respect de estos casos históricos.

“Or yet, how can we talk about reconciliation if the violence and structural causes of conflicts are still present?” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 6)

“The perspective of the Critical Studies of Transitions proposes to think about liminality, to consider longterm violence and to identify the continuities in its dialectics with ruptures, in order to detect the tensions that they reflect when individuals or peoples interconnect in the present with larger historical processes, to create a future.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 7)

In Australia, the government recently announced compensation for thousands of Indigenous people who, during their childhood, were removed from their families and confined in “white” homes (the so-called “Stolen Generation,” estimated at about 100,000 people). The Labor government apologized for these state crimes, choosing terms such as “healing” and “reconciliation,” which include the possibility for victims to tell their stories publicly and receive a direct apology from government authorities.

On the other hand, claims for economic reparation and the right to truth have been made by the Herero and Nama communities of Namibia against Germany for crimes committed at the beginning of the 20th century. In 2021, the German government announced its willingness in principle to carry out substantial returns of the so-called “Benin Bronzes,” preserved in German museums with specific indications of their provenance, in addition to initiating the first returns to Nigeria to be exhibited in the new EMOWAA museum (Edo Museum of West African Art).

“La restitución de bienes culturales es una rama de la diplomacia cultural que ha adquirido relevancia en los últimos años en el ámbito de las relaciones culturales internacionales, en buena medida, a partir del impulso de los movimientos anticolonialistas.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “A la par de las reparaciones económicas, consulares, entre otras, la reparación al daño colonial desde la cultura resulta particularmente necesaria pues apela a la destrucción más profunda de los pueblos: la cultura en sí misma.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “sucedido durante el Reparto de África en el siglo xix. Valiéndome del caso de los Bronces de Benín, hurtados por el Reino Unido durante la expedición punitiva de 1897, y tratándose de esculturas y figuras de latón, bronce y otros materiales, propiedad del Reino de Benín, hoy provincia del estado de Edo, en Nigeria” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “Cabe resaltar que la naturaleza de estas políticas es de corte más bien moral, pues no existe sustento legal internacional que opere en favor de restituir dichos objetos culturales.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 363) “En el caso que nos ocupa, la restitución es reparación y viene de la voluntad del país poseedor (y de sus instituciones culturales)” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 363)

“For example, the Hererro community in Namibia has instituted a legal claim against German companies seeking reparations for the enslavement and destruction of their tribe. The lawsuit alleges that imperial Germany (which colonized Namibia in the early twentieth century) had formed a "brutal alliance" with German industry and engaged in enslavement, extermination, forced labor, medical experimentation, and other crimes in order to advance common financial interests. See Hererros Sue German Firm for Reparations, BUSINESS DAY, Sept. 6, 2001, available at http://allafrica.com/storiesl200109060457/html (last visited Oct. 9, 2001). For a description of German colonization in Southwest Africa, see A Bloody History: Namibia's Colonization,BBC NEWS, Aug. 29, 2001, available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/africa/newsidl514000/1514 856.stm (last visited Oct. 9, 2001).” (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 131)

“Between 2011 and 2012, two events resurrected Britain’s and Germany’s colonial history back into the public eye. In April 2011, Mau Mau victims from Kenya travelled to Britain to ask for “compensation for the harms they had suffered in British detention camps” (Collste 2015: 108). Subsequently, a UK court awarded the Mau Mau victims the right to sue in British courts. In September 2011, the Herero and Nama peoples of Namibia travelled to Germany to “bring home 20 skulls that had been brought to Germany after the genocide” in 1904, which had been used for “supposed scientific studies aimed at underpinning the doctrine of racial superiority of Europeans over Africans” (Knight 2011). Both these events sparked debates on reparations for crimes that were committed long ago (see also articles by Rolston and Ní Aoláin, and Atiles-Osoria in this volume).” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 369)

“The Herero tribe attempted to seek redress through the US court system on various occasions. The Herero filed suit against Deutsche Bank5 for funding the imperial German government during the time of the genocide. The lawsuit sought “compensation to buy land from white farmers” and “a formal apology from the German government”” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “The timing of the first lawsuit coincided with a movement in Namibia for land reform. The Herero attempt at filing judicial lawsuits was to avoid the forceful land grabs from White farmers that were taking place in Zimbabwe and South Africa (McGreal 2001).” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “In 2001, the Herero People’s Reparations Corporation filed suit for a total of US$4 billion against the German government, Deutsche Bank, Terex Corporation and Weormann Line. In 2004, after the case was moved to the Federal District Court, the Court determined that the Herero had no “statutory basis for asserting jurisdiction over Woermann Line” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “In 2006, the Appeals Court in New Jersey upheld the lower court’s dismissal of the Herero claim for “brutally employed slave labor and \[running\] its own concentration camp”” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 378)

“we outline a formula for how courts can address reparations in a meaningful manner for colonial state crimes.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379) “What are the appropriate remedies for colonial state crimes such as genocide and crimes against humanity? Reparations are broad and can include anything from therapy for victims, through to monetary compensation, symbolic apology or memorials. States and scholars raise three large objections for issuing reparations for colonial state crimes. These objections are as follows: first, the actual perpetrators are not present to be held accountable for their actions; second, the victims who would have been afforded reparations are no longer alive to receive compensation and third, the crimes we speak of today did not exist at the time of the commission of colonial state crimes” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379)

“In close to 100 per cent of the cases arising from colonialism, it is likely that the perpetrator was an agent or representative of the state” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379). What about companies? “Whether the perpetrator is alive is only a question that is relevant for the purposes of assigning criminal liability to punish an individual for their specific actions. However, civil liability could also be assigned to the state as a whole for gross human rights violations and crimes that have been perpetrated,” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380). But also within criminal field.

“while the descendants of victims of crimes against humanity and genocide bring forward claims, reparations are even more vital. One of the largest impacts these groups have faced is the loss of valuable land they once possessed. The impact of state colonial crimes that once targeted these peoples continues in economic and social terms.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380)

“Although international criminal law had not reached full doctrinal maturity in the late 1800s, international law, in its initial stages still provided for reparative justice and/or compensation for aggrieved parties. It is important to note that even 100 years ago, customary law provided for individual compensation” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380) “In 1796, for example, the United States Supreme Court found that private individuals had the right to compensation for acts that had occurred during war.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380) “The formula would be applied on a case-by-case basis. It includes a determination of what state crimes took place, whether the state crimes that took place have a continued impact on remaining victims and survivors, and if so, what kinds of reparations would be appropriate to bring a holistic redress to the crimes that took place.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382) “Whatever reparations are determined to provide holistic redress should then be given by the offending state directly to the victims and those reparations should provide a direct and ultimate benefit to the survivors.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382) “it is important that the reparations provided offer a holistic redress.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382)

“In the case of the Mau Mau, Herero, and Nama peoples, appropriate reparations may include a symbolic and genuine apology” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383) “Outside of an apology, reparations may further include opportunities such as educational scholarships for descendants of victims for education to assist with efforts in eradicating poverty. It may also include monetary restitution, designated as restitution for crimes committed even though monetary compensation cannot erase the pains of the past (Minow 1998: 117) and the return of all cultural artefacts.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“Finally, in many cases, memorials attributed to honour victims of crimes would be appropriate.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“United Nations “Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law” issued in 2005.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383) “While some reference is made to Convention as far back as 1907, the basic principles may not be applied to colonial state crime cases. Therefore, courts should ensure that victims and survivors of grave colonial crimes should be represented directly.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“Protection of victim and survivor rights during legal proceedings is perhaps an area of international criminal law that needs growth” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 384)

Belgium, France, and the Netherlands receive similar claims. Belgium’s highest powers, including King Philippe, have led various reparation measures, beginning in 2020 with the creation of a Special Parliamentary Commission of inquiry into the Belgian colonial past, which presented an expert report recommending reparation measures, apologies, and the return of objects and human remains, such as those of the former leader Patrice Lumumba. In 2021, the government of the Netherlands announced its intention to initiate reparation policies and return cultural heritage objects stolen during the colonial era to their countries of origin, following the publication by the Council of Culture of the report “Colonial Collection and a Recognition of Injustice.” In 2021, the African Union Commission organized a continental expert workshop on the “Restitution of Cultural Property and Heritage” at the Museum of Black Civilizations in Dakar (Senegal), in which a common African position was drafted.

These are just a few of the initiatives, whose developments are often contradictory, incomplete, or merely formal, but which account for a driving force advancing at a global level. In the sum of all these milestones and investigations—which propose a complex and interdisciplinary perspective—economic and material reparation (restitution of stolen objects), the recognition of crimes, formal apologies, and various mechanisms for access and the right to truth and justice are all at stake.

## A milestone: Napalpí Case

At the beginning of the 1970s, a team of researchers traveled to Chaco to conduct a situational study on the lives of the Chaco region’s Indigenous population. One of these researchers traveled to Colonia Aborigen, where the Napalpí Indian Reduction (Reducción de Indios de Napalpí) had operated until the mid-20th century. This researcher gathered various testimonies. The memory of the massacre reflected in his notes originated from members of the ruling classes and still carried a disciplinary tone. “The only good Indian is a dead Indian,” they told him. The type of memory installed by the State and the ruling classes since the time of the massacre was still in force.

Half a century later, in 2022, a Truth Trial (Juicio por la Verdad) was carried out in a Chaco federal court, in which more than fifty witnesses testified, including relatives of the victims as well as Indigenous and non-Indigenous experts and researchers. The trial concluded with a conviction against the State for the massacre and the ordering of a series of reparations, along with the creation of a Sentence Execution Unit tasked with monitoring the reparatory policies. The Napalpí Massacre was thus transformed into an exemplary case that demonstrated how an act of foundational violence managed to cross the threshold of centennial oblivion, utilizing a novel terrain and a format already tested in Argentina for the crimes of state terrorism during times of impunity: the Truth Trials.

How was the silence overcome in half a century, and how were the limits of the classic transitional justice model—built by human rights organizations to judge the crimes of the dictatorship—stretched? Which actors and conditions were fundamental, not only for the emergence of the memories of the communities themselves but for those memories to achieve reparation through the justice system?

In the first place, one must situate the re-emergence of an Indigenous narrative in the 1990s, coinciding with the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Spanish conquerors in the Caribbean islands. In Argentina, this impulse resulted in the incorporation of an article recognizing Indigenous populations in the 1994 Constitutional Reform. Simultaneously, the process of memory, truth, and justice was understood by the communities as an opportunity for the emergence of narratives regarding human rights violations suffered by Indigenous populations. This shifted the focus away from the traditional foundational event of the modern Argentine state—the military campaigns of southern occupation initiated in 1879—recognizing the importance of the advance of state dominance toward the Chaco as well, where a confrontation with the Qom and Moqoit populations took place in 1883 in a place they called Napalpí, consummating the Indigenous defeat and enabling the first experiences of state “reductions” in that territory.

This community initiative is largely exemplified by the political and intellectual trajectory of Juan Chico, a Qom teacher and historian who, in the 1990s as a very young man, began to recover the memories of the grandfathers and grandmothers of Colonia Aborigen. His impulse converged with the concerns of historians and anthropologists from the Universidad del Nordeste and other academic institutions, who began to think of the massacre as a unit of analysis rather than an isolated and silenced episode. [79](#footnote79) At the end of the 2000s and the beginning of the following decade, this search was incorporated, step by step, into the institutional policies of the Chaco State and, later, the National State.[80](#footnote80)

When Juan Chico managed to convince federal prosecutors in 2014 to initiate a request for a Truth Trial, there was already a transcendental accumulation of political work in memory reconstruction and research. [81](#footnote81) The creation of the Napalpí Foundation, under the direction of Juan Chico and other Indigenous leaders, their institutional participation in the National Institute of Indigenous Affairs (INAI), and the commitment of the Secretariats of Human Rights of the Nation and the Province of Chaco, provided sufficient support. More than anything, what influenced the outcome was the ability to convince the Indigenous community to involve itself in the claim to open the path of justice—an institution that had historically denied their history. Thus, the collective subject was constructed as both victim and plaintiff.

In this way, the breakthrough was driven by the memory of the descendants and, crucially, the political will to convert academic research (which had already proven the massacre) into judicial evidence. Qom and Moqoit communities preserved memory through generational oral transmission, ritual commemorations, and collective testimony that contradicted official negation. This “subterranean memory” (Pollak) circulated within communities despite—and because of—state denial. Anthropologists and historians began documenting these testimonies decades later, creating alternative archives. Academic research reconstructed the massacre through archival investigation, oral histories, and critical reading of official documents. This research produced juridical-quality evidence: testimonies, expert reports, and historical analysis demonstrating systematic violence and state responsibility.

The figure of the Truth Trial, by not seeking criminal convictions of individuals and not accusing any state authority or civilian actor in absentia, allowed for historical-legal recognition. The victims were represented by a state institution of direct Indigenous representation: the Instituto del Aborigen Chaqueño (IDACH). The formal accusation was handled by the federal prosecutor’s office. The Secretariat of Human Rights of Chaco was also admitted as a plaintiff. The National Secretariat of Human Rights committed its political support by designating the site as a Site of Memory (Sitio de Memoria) and presenting historical research and expert testimony. Thus, Napalpí demonstrates how Indigenous memory narratives (oral traditions, ceremonies) become the political resource to build a bridge toward justice, even at a 100-year distance.

A central point during the hearings was the projection by some actors to present arguments to incorporate the legal figure of genocide into a possible sentence. This was an objective that lacked unanimity, in the same sense that it historically sparked conflicts in classic trials for crimes against humanity. Ultimately, the prosecution did not charge for genocide. It requested the recognition of imprescriptibility via the concept of crimes against humanity and claimed convictions based on the penal code figures in force at the time of the events: treacherous murder (asesinato alevoso) and servitude. The judge recognized the legitimacy of the claim and convicted for crimes against humanity within the framework of a process of genocide. Following this, she took up the claims for reparation and ordered various measures, considering the sentence itself to be the first reparatory policy. Subsequently, the measures included historical memory preservation, monument construction, educational programs incorporating Indigenous perspectives, support for territorial claims, and infrastructure, health, and education programs for affected communities.

The ruling came 98 years after the massacre. While symbolically and juridically significant—validating community memory and establishing state responsibility—it cannot resurrect the dead or undo a century of dispossession. Contemporary challenges persist: Indigenous communities throughout Argentina face ongoing land dispossession, poverty, discrimination, and marginalization. The question remains whether this recognition contributes to transforming present conditions or primarily provides historical closure while structural violence continues. Indeed, although the message of the sentence was widely disseminated with great legitimacy through the media, there were voices that, for various reasons, rejected this judicial recognition.[82](#footnote82)

One reason for the rejection is related to another judicial process—older and of a civil nature—that was carried out in the same court regarding the Napalpí massacre and another committed in 1947 in the province of Formosa, further north, known as the Rincón Bomba Massacre of Pilagá communities.

Napalpí demonstrates that the threshold of memory is political, not merely temporal. The case crossed from denied event to recognized atrocity through sustained Indigenous organizing, academic translation of oral memory into juridical evidence, and favorable political-legal conditions. It establishes a precedent for prosecuting century-old violence as imprescriptible crimes against humanity. Yet it also reveals reparation’s paradox: acknowledging historical injustice while the structural conditions generating that injustice remain largely unchanged.

The Napalpí case exemplifies several dynamics central to understanding memory’s selectivity. The massacre remained “subterranean” for decades—known to affected communities but denied by official history. Its crossing into recognized atrocity required: (1) sustained Indigenous organizing transforming collective memory into political claim, (2) academic research translating oral testimony into documentary evidence, (3) juridical innovation applying the crimes against humanity framework to century-old violence, and (4) political will emerging from the broader human rights culture developed through dictatorship accountability processes.

Yet Napalpí also reveals troubling questions: why did this specific massacre cross the threshold while countless other instances of Indigenous violence remain unaddressed? The answer isn’t that Napalpí was “worse” than other violence but that specific organizational, juridical, and political conditions converged. This underscores the threshold’s fundamentally political character—not all violence, however severe, crosses into recognition and reparation.

## La tragedia del quebracho colorado

In 1965, Gastón Gori was commissioned to write a historical essay on the company that, two years prior, had closed its last tannin factory in the country and was then preparing to cease operations permanently. In just a few months, Gori scoured documents, press reports, and speeches to build a work that became iconic. In it, the Santa Fe writer not only denounced the logic of the British company’s operations—which had devastated millenary quebracho forests before relocating to Africa—but also recovered from oblivion the memories of the social struggles that had occurred four decades earlier and culminated in the massacre.

Gori rescued details of these events through journalistic chronicles and denunciations made in the provincial legislature, detailing the crimes committed by the company-funded militarized police and identifying the victims by name. Around the same time, Osvaldo Bayer would begin to reconstruct, in even greater detail, the struggles that took place in Patagonia.

Among the voices recovered by Gori were those of the Doldán brothers, local politicians who denounced La Forestal for its multiple outrages. He also recovered personal histories and a broader issue recently denounced by provincial deputy Anacarsis Acevedo: the exodus of the towns, given that the company had neither allowed nor facilitated an adequate productive reconversion. Indeed, while Gori’s essay gained enormous relevance in a historical context charged with revolutionary struggles and imaginaries, it was also steeped in nostalgia. Another great writer, Rodolfo Walsh—who had recently reconstructed the 1956 José León Suárez massacre—traveled north to describe the devastation left by the company; it was then that he spoke of the “ghost towns,” a stigma that settled over the former productive territories.

Shortly after the Cuban Revolution, within a political and social democracy besieged by military forces and economic powers, Gori’s narrative quickly reached the big screen through the film Quebracho. The film recovered the events of 1921 only at its beginning, focusing later on other displays of corporate violence, particularly the confrontation between the manager of the most important town and the popular Radical leader Rogelio Lamazón, murdered in 1940 amid an electoral contest by the company’s will. Other journalistic chronicles—very few—then recovered the history of a company that had exploited “slave labor,” devastated forests, and savagely repressed rebelling workers. During this time, the Crónica cantada de La Forestal by Oscar Ielpi became known, and some residents set out to reconstruct and transmit collective memories of a history for which they felt—not without reason—to be the last guardians: communist workers and participants in strikes and union reorganization experiences that had already been forgotten, such as those of the 1930s.

In parallel, former employees, executives, and the company itself narrated an official history: that of a true provider-father who brought “civilization” and productive life to a wild territory, organizing welfare societies. They sought to tell the “true” story of La Forestal and reject, as Luis Delfino explicitly stated, visions “altered by one political position or another.” The book with which the Buenos Aires-based Board of Directors sought to counter criticism of its relocation to another continent was titled: La Forestal, at the Service of Argentine Greatness.

By the 1970s and 80s, the subject entered academia and development institutes. From dependency theory perspectives, researchers sought to understand the extractive logic and social control policies, and to rethink productive perspectives following the company’s abrupt departure. The massacre, with its victims and perpetrators, was subsumed under a different kind of violence—one with systemic roots: the extractive, latifundist, and accumulative logic of capital.

Without that perspective disappearing, in the 1990s and especially at the turn of the new century, a viewpoint emerged from the towns themselves. They sought to reconstruct their histories, rethink themselves in light of their centennials, and reverse the migratory logic of their populations, particularly the younger generations. With a perspective of creating historical tourism projects and recovering cultural and architectural heritage as an economic activity, the “La Forestal” subject re-emerged. However, the binary logic regarding its legacy—exploitative and criminal versus civilizing and providing—was quickly recreated. In this context, the 1921 massacre was again brought to the fore. The book Revuelta obrera y masacre en La Forestal, featuring unprecedented official documentation, reopened a pending debate. In its wake, various literary reconstructions appeared, most of them situated in the context of the centennial massacre or making metaphorical allusions. In just five years, at least five novels set their sights on those events.

In 2021, for the first time in the history of the forest towns, official acts were organized to commemorate the centennial labor struggles. The Covid-19 pandemic did not stop the event. Talks, debates, video presentations, and the inauguration of cultural and historical spaces took place with significant media coverage and the intervention of multiple actors—from national and provincial officials and unions to academic institutions like CLACSO, intellectuals, teachers, and local students. The event was organized by a commission for the recovery of forest tradition and identity. Regional municipalities participated regardless of political identity. The governor and vice-governor of the province gave welcoming remarks during a live broadcast on provincial television.

In Villa Guillermina, a monument was erected to Teófilo Lafuente, the first general secretary of the tannin workers and a protagonist of those struggles. His grandchildren were present. The creation of a park for memory and identity was also announced. In Villa Ana, the opening of the 25th Quebracho Festival was used to unveil a mural projecting a photo taken in November 1920 in a logging camp (obraje) in La Gallareta, showing anarchist workers in struggle, displaying saddles, weapons, guitars, and violins. That festival night, however, one of the guest artists asked the audience for a round of applause in memory of the company that had provided so much work in its time. More recently, a group of explorers with metal detectors recovered hundreds of spent bullets in an area recognized by tradition as a site of combat between workers and the Gendarmería. Immediately, a heritage rescue commission was put into action under the policy of the provincial Ministry of Culture, based on the hypothesis of finding material remains of the massacre. Simultaneously, in the context of a far-right neoliberal government advancing an anti-union labor reform, the rejection of a “return to the times of La Forestal” resonates in some protests.

Despite the enormous accumulation of research and the reconstruction of memories of the massacre—similar to other cases like Napalpí or Patagonia—there has been no judicial translation of the case to date. Why? Should there be one? If so, who should promote it?

For now, we can observe that not all historical knowledge translates into juridical action, and not all violence becomes subject to accountability even when well-documented. Several dynamics explain this: in the case of La Forestal, the primary reason may be the lack of an organized group of victims/descendants mobilized around legal claims. Historical truth exists; juridical accountability does not. This reveals that the translation from knowledge to justice requires not only documentation but organized social actors with political will, legal expertise, and sustained commitment. Historical truth, however well-established, does not automatically generate accountability. This limitation is not a failure of academic research per se but a recognition that justice is a political process, not an automatic consequence of knowledge production. Research creates possibilities, but realizing those possibilities requires movements, not only scholars.

On the other hand, the current lack of an actor to mobilize social and political forces also inhibits literary narratives and memory work from translating into a stage of greater political confrontation. Something of this nature might have occurred when the national press spent several weeks covering the Peronist government’s initiative to expropriate the Vicentín company. Based in the same northern region of Santa Fe, Vicentín—despite its differences with La Forestal—evoked reminders of the latter, partly due to its power in the region and partly because it had also been denounced for its responsibility in the repression of workers during the dictatorship. However, this did not happen. The paths did not converge.

## Cien años de soledad

In 2025, for the first time in Colombia’s history, a sitting president participated in the commemoration of the Banana Massacre (Masacre de las Bananeras). Gustavo Petro, governing under the Pacto Histórico, traveled to Ciénaga, Magdalena, and announced a collective reparation plan that recognizes the labor union movement as a subject of reparation within the framework of the armed conflict. He also presented a bill to officially commemorate the 1928 massacre of workers committed by the U.S.-based United Fruit Co. (UFCo), ahead of its upcoming centennial. In his speech, Petro drew a line to the past with a sense of the present: “The United Fruit Company today is called Chiquita Brands, and it has continued to kill workers in Colombia,” he said. The president compared the 1928 victims to the thousands of banana workers murdered in Urabá between the 1980s and the early 21st century under “paramilitary governance.” The connection to the present is clear: during the commemoration, Petro and his Minister of Labor warned that labor violence persists. Recent inspections by the Ministry of Labor in the banana farms of Magdalena have found situations similar to those of a century ago: shifts exceeding 10 hours, with women earning half as much as men.[83](#footnote83)

To reach the present with such symbolic force, the historical journey of the massacre’s memory presents similarities to the case of La Forestal. Under specific circumstances, it was either forgotten or evoked in different ways, as collective memory articulated aspirations for justice and political practices within the working classes. Once the massacre was consummated, the company, conservative media, and the government portrayed workers as communist insurgents to justify military intervention. UFCo issued a communiqué celebrating the “revolutionary strike’s” resolution. The impacts of the massacre were strong enough to end Conservative rule after more than thirty years, amid the impact of the economic crisis. Liberal congressmen, particularly Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, denounced the massacre in Congress, though the ruling party blocked investigations.

Gaitán maintained agitation around the events, and his popularity and radicalism grew in subsequent years. Six months after the events, he traveled to the banana zone and gathered information, including testimonies from people who claimed to have been assaulted or who witnessed the army’s arbitraries. In Bogotá, the memory surfaced through street demonstrations and congressional debates. President Miguel Abadía Méndez presented a report on the previous year’s events in Ciénaga. General Cortés Vargas, for his part, published a justificatory memoir (1929), portraying military action as a legitimate defense against a communist revolution. However, Gaitán categorized the events as “crimes against the fatherland” committed by “ruthless and unmerciful men.” He also secured the passage of a law providing for the review of sentences handed down to those accused of participating in the strike and established financial compensation for the widows and children of the workers.[84](#footnote84)

One of the detained activists was Alberto Castrillón, a strike leader and member of the PSR, a party that made symbolic use of the events on their first anniversary. On December 6, 1929, he launched his presidential candidacy. In prison, Castrillón wrote a text relating his participation in the strike and the events following the massacre, thus seizing the political opportunity. These were not simply different perspectives on a shared event but battles over historical truth with concrete political stakes: whose version became official history, whose suffering was recognized, and who bore responsibility.

After 1930, the Liberal Party, now the governing force, felt the massacre no longer held the same symbolic weight it had during the fall of the Conservative Hegemony, leading to its gradual oblivion in that sector. The left, particularly the Communist Party, lacked the political capital to evoke it with greater intensity.[85](#footnote85)

In the early 1960s, the event leaped into fictional narrative. Álvaro Cepeda Samudio initiated a new period in banana literature in 1962 with his masterful work La casa grande. He was the first of a list of coastal novelists who reconstructed and reinterpreted the events. Experimenting with avant-garde narrative forms, he offered an original way to describe the violence and the impact of the strike. By blurring the idea of the conflict as a simple clash between workers and a foreign company, La casa grande placed the local bourgeoisie at the center of responsibility as the catalysts of the tragedy.[86](#footnote86)

Another novel describing the local bourgeoisie is Zig-zag en las bananeras (1964) by Efraín Tovar Mozo, which mentioned the figure of 3,000 deaths. Around that time, Gabriel García Márquez reconstructed the events in a novel that had a massive political impact, depicting yellow train cars full of corpses dumped into the sea. His fictional account in One Hundred Years of Solitude (iolen1967) ensured the massacre entered global consciousness as a symbol of corporate-state v ce. While his account—only one survivor believing what he witnessed while everyone else denies—exceeded documented facts, it captured the essential truth about scale and impunity. The novel’s worldwide circulation gave the massacre a recognition no historical account could achieve.[87](#footnote87)

At that time, within the context of the radicalization of social and political struggles in the 1960s and 1970s, the left became more heterogeneous and expanded its forms of communication and networks (both cultural and academic). This allowed the representation of the massacre to spread to urban and intellectual sectors, reaching beyond traditional unionism. In 1968, forty years after the event, communists once again turned to the memory of the massacre. In doing so, they revisited the idea of the “plague of insomnia” (peste del olvido), drawing a parallel with those who “today sow death, violence, and terror.” The previous twenty years had been lived under a state of siege, with numerous assassinations of union activists in events such as the 1963 Santa Bárbara massacre.[88](#footnote88) One of the protagonists of these struggles, Ignacio Torres Giraldo, provided a detailed narrative of both these contemporary conflicts and the historical banana strike.

In 1978, at the fiftieth anniversary of the massacre, the memory of the events re-emerged with great magnitude, demonstrating once again that evocation was conceived as a “duty of memory” articulated with a “duty of justice,” aimed at dynamicizing the political confrontations of the present. Workers reinforced their conceptions of the State and the elites as “murderers” and “repressors.” Consequently, various sectors of the left and the National Union Council—which gathered the four main labor federations—deployed efforts to organize the commemoration, giving rise to a unique event in the history of its evocation. As had never occurred before, the commemoration was nourished by dynamics such as the erection of monuments, public rallies, musical concerts, publications, and the staging of plays, such as Huelga de las Bananeras by Jaime Díaz and El Sol Subterráneo by Jairo Aníbal Niño. One reason for this was the transformation that had taken place within the Colombian left, which at that time consisted of a varied set of forces, including parties, movements, and guerrilla organizations. [89](#footnote89)

On that December 6, nearly fifteen thousand people attended, including locals, union activists, and regional and national militants from all left-wing organizations. The remembrance was connected to present circumstances, such as the Security Statute of the Julio César Turbay Ayala government (1978), demanding the lifting of the state of siege. This juncture served to stimulate the publication of research on the event. Three important texts appeared: Bananeras 1928-1978, prepared by a commission from the Center for Social Research (CEIS)—individuals linked to or close to the Communist Party who, despite not being professional historians, collected front-page documents and testimonies; Gabriel Fonnegra, a militant of the MOIR, published the book Bananeras, testimonio vivo de una epopeya in 1980; and in 1981, Carlos Arango, a journalist linked to the Communist Party, published Sobrevivientes de las bananeras, which gathered first-hand accounts. In Fonnegra’s case, he speaks of “silence as a political syndrome” protecting conservative interests—a silence that renders certain violence unspeakable, unmemorable, and unrepairable. This is not passive forgetting but active suppression: threatening those who speak, destroying evidence, monopolizing archival access, controlling educational curricula, and dominating media narratives. Memory struggles are not only about the past but about present power: those who control the historical narrative control political legitimacy. Extensive historical scholarship documented the massacre: Catherine LeGrand, Judith White, Marcelo Bucheli, and others reconstructed UFCo’s operations, labor relations, and state collaboration.

Access to historical research, however, brought conflicts with memory work and literary reconstruction, given that One Hundred Years of Solitude had a vast influence, even in school education. Authors such as Eduardo Posada Carbó criticized the creation of distortions in the historical truth, maintaining that the version in One Hundred Years of Solitude influenced how Colombians remember the event, sometimes displacing more careful historical reconstruction with literary imagining. The massacre gained universal recognition but perhaps at the cost of specificity and accountability. The aesthetic power that made the novel culturally successful may have limited its political utility for justice movements. [90](#footnote90) Fundamentally, the author rejects the victim count of 3,000 dead, starting from the confession of García Márquez himself, who stated that the real number must have been “quite small.” This did not imply denying the facts, as historical records evidence between 47 and 2,000 deaths and 600 detainees subjected to military justice, with 31 strikers sentenced to terms ranging from 2 to 25 years in prison (all released nine months later). Posada Carbó also sought to politicize the massacre by highlighting that these were not just workers in a labor conflict, but that the full activism of the Revolutionary Socialist Party was present with intentions of overthrowing the conservative government and establishing a revolutionary regime, concluding that the period was not a repressive and dictatorial one.

In recent decades, within the framework of the transitional justice process and official memory and truth policies, the event has been sustained to establish lines of continuity with the present being reviewed. When the eightieth anniversary was commemorated in 2008, the political context was marked by the second presidency of Álvaro Uribe Vélez and investigations into the links between multinationals (Chiquita Brands) and paramilitary groups (parapolítica). The campaign slogan was: “¿Tienes la memoria chiquita?” (Is your memory “Chiquita”/small?). The “appearance of continuity” of the event allowed human rights organizations to use the commemoration to fuel narratives about state persecution and to claim the necessity of policies for the defense of collective memory. Those events for the 80th anniversary were held in Ciénaga starting on December 1 and included multiple activities, notably religious acts, conferences, forums, book launches, musical performances, vigils, and pictorial and film exhibitions.[91](#footnote91) The acts concluded with a mobilization on December 6, attended by people from different parts of the country and journalists from news outlets such as Noticias Uno, Telesur, and Contravía, among others. [92](#footnote92) This was used as a means to resist the right-wing government’s insistence on approving the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) imposed by the United States, described as being “for the benefit of its multinationals that plunder national wealth, production, and labor.”

Parallel to this, new publications on the event—both academic and political—began to address the problem of memory and justice within the framework of historical continuity between the past and present.[93](#footnote93) Framing these events as crimes against humanity, as done by Archila Neira or Sánchez Ángel, is directly linked to the work of Colombia’s National Center for Historical Memory (CNMH) and the Truth Commission (CEV, 2018-2022), which comprehensively addressed corporate violence, including 1928. The CEV’s final report (2022) affirmed workers’ accounts, documented systematic UFCo-state collaboration, and analyzed how the banana industry exemplified corporate violence’s role in Colombia’s broader conflict.

At the 96th anniversary commemoration, thanks to the tenacity of a small core of “memory entrepreneurs” from Ciénaga (such as Agustín Lara, Gustavo Polo, and Edgardo Alemán), a turning point occurred, advancing the incipient institutionalization of the commemorative event and transforming it into a state matter. The reasons for this change include increased external attendance, a significant alliance between local foundations and the labor union Sintraunicol from Cali, the presence of officials from the new progressive national government, the proposal of new focuses—highlighting, for example, the leading role of women—and the need to break the systematic stigmatization of social organization.[94](#footnote94)

Nearly one hundred years after the events, local proposals exist that seek to transcend the threshold of memory and research to access integral reparation and justice. The presence of Petro and his announcements regarding the 100-year commemoration are transcendental. The December 6 Foundation (for Ciénaga society) and the Committee for the Reparation of the Labor Movement (CONARE) demand collective reparation. They do so with the political urgency of taking advantage of the current juncture. However, despite extensive documentation, cultural consecration, and truth commission recognition, significant dilemmas remain: how transcendental can official recognition be? Who is the subject of reparation? What role does the judicial arena play? To date, no criminal prosecution of UFCo or successor companies (United Brands, Chiquita) has occurred in Colombia. This is partly because UFCo liquidated and reformed multiple times, and Chiquita claims to be a different legal entity. Furthermore, in Colombia, the 1928 events predate the crimes against humanity doctrine; no legal framework for retroactive prosecution existed when transitional justice processes began in the 2000s-2020s.

