# Introduction

A specialized news website reports that in Brazil, cattle ranchers who exploit forced labor and invade indigenous lands are driving the destruction the forests, while looking earns and highlighting industry’s failure in stablishing transparent and sustainable supply chains.[1](#footnote1) Another source states that in 2024, over two thousand people were rescued from slavery like conditions.[2](#footnote2) Additionally, Colombia’s Labor Ministry has shut down transnational ships due to labor irregularities and evidence of modern slavery.[3](#footnote3) In Perú, mining is especially a dangerous economy for workers and community, dealing with criminality and business, as it currently happens in Pataz department, North East umented cases on the continent occur in Latin America and the Caribbean. Our findings reveal a statistically significant association, with 99% confidence, between the presence of Indigenous peoples resisting mega-mining projects and a higher incidence of criminalization, repression, and assassinations. This highlights how mega-mining primarily threatens rural territories. This study contributes to the understanding of power dynamics in socio-environmental conflicts, emphasizing the urgency of reimagining our societies towards models that prioritize social and environmental justice.","container-title":"Convergencia Revista de Ciencias Sociales","DOI":"10.29101/crcs.v31i0.23230","ISSN":"2448-5799","journalAbbreviation":"conrec","language":"es","license":"http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0","page":"1","source":"DOI.org (Crossref)","title":"Panorama de la violencia minera contra pueblos indígenas en el continente americano","volume":"31","author":\[{"family":"Gómez Liendo","given":"Marx José"},{"family":"Olmedo Neri","given":"Raul Anthony"},{"family":"Serrano Sánchez","given":"Ángel"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2024",10,29\]\]}}},{"id":28356,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/9RDCA8BV"\],"itemData":{"id":28356,"type":"article-journal","language":"es","source":"Zotero","title":"La provincia minera de Pataz","author":\[{"family":"Sánchez","given":"Esteban Landeras"}\]}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} (Cárdenas Ruiz & Saraiva De Loreto, 2019; Gómez Liendo et al., 2024; Sánchez, n.d.). In 2025, in North Argentina forced labor was discover in an olive plantation: the federal police rescued twenty-one young workers without contract suffering unacceptable conditions. This action was officialy published on the web.[4](#footnote4) According to ILO, more than 50 million people suffer modern slavery globaly. More than 5 million in America. The profit reported in this business surpasses 230 thousand millons of dollars. In Latinamerica, victims yield a profit of about fifteen thousand dollars a year "(Organización Internacional del Trabajo et al., 2022; Organización Internacional del Trabajo Internacional del Trabajo & Internationale Arbeitsorganisation, 2024)\\r","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":\[{"id":28338,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/UAD5K8UQ"\],"itemData":{"id":28338,"type":"book","ISBN":"978-92-2-037483-2","language":"en","number-of-pages":"1","publisher":"International Labour Office","publisher-place":"Geneva","source":"K10plus ISBN","title":"Global estimates of modern slavery: forced labour and forced marriage","title-short":"Global estimates of modern slavery","editor":\[{"literal":"Organización Internacional del Trabajo"},{"literal":"Internationales Arbeitsamt"},{"literal":"Walk Free Foundation"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2022"\]\]}}},{"id":28348,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/5RA6QT66"\],"itemData":{"id":28348,"type":"book","edition":"Second edition","ISBN":"978-92-2-040421-8","language":"en","number-of-pages":"1","publisher":"International Labour Office","publisher-place":"Geneva, Switzerland","source":"K10plus ISBN","title":"Profits and poverty: the economics of forced labour","title-short":"Profits and poverty","editor":\[{"family":"Organización Internacional del Trabajo Internacional del Trabajo","given":""},{"literal":"Internationale Arbeitsorganisation"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2024"\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} (Organización Internacional del Trabajo et al., 2022; Organización Internacional del Trabajo Internacional del Trabajo & Internationale Arbeitsorganisation, 2024).

At the same time, it’s possible to read that young indigenous people in Peru claim for the constitution of a Truth Commission to investigate business massive crimes committed during the “rubber era”, in the Peruvian Amazon, between 1880 and 1920.[5](#footnote5) They presented an habeas corpus with the Mixed Court of Nauta, in the Loreto region, demanding on the right to truth, recognized by the Constitutional Court of Peru as a fundamental principle of justice and reparation. “Violence is cyclical in the Amazon” they denounce, to advert that crimes are still happening and, at the same time, violence is naturalized, with state cultural artefacts, such as the “Paseo del Caucho” in Iquitos, promoted in 2024 as a tourist attraction. This claim connects very deeply with the analysis from the previous section and, as we will see later, with the third movement towards a more distant past. And all of them are inevitabily related to the current corporate violence we stated before. So, we are talking not only about past actions that have to be adreesed. Violence and claims araise in the present.

For an approach to this present phenomeno of corporate violence and a comprehending about different ways to face it, we should detain in two different but related historical processes that encompases society and business, within academics, but not so. We talk about Corporate Social Responsabilty policies and Business and Human Rithgs movement. As many authors states, business and society, as a broad research field, addresses the economic, social, and political roles of business in relationship to various stakeholder groups –such as working class- and different dimensions of society (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2022). But while the CSR discourse is rooted in management and business scholarship, BHR by and large originated from legal scholarship. We will move so into this first movement, being expectants about eventual role claim for historiography and also the vocation and caution that historians employ for making a substantive contribution to this specific issue.

# First movement

## Historic Corporate Social Responsibility and intented forgefultness

### Social Responsibilities of the Businessman

Nowadays, specialized scholars from Business School or Management address what I call corporate violence, particularly concerning companies’ societal guidance, social roles and legitimacy, terming it as corporate irresponsability, harmfull behaivours, harmdoing or complicity within authoritarian contexts, generally referring these actions as external engange with violents acts. This approaches develop from the big framework that has historically been the Corporate Social Responsibility field, now presented also with further specific additions to talk about these undesired behavior, like moral, political or historical responsibility, wheter or not these explicitly align with human rights framework (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2022).

When we talk about CSR or in a more broader way about business and society, we have firstly to explicit that there is no really agreement on what thas that means and what actions or phenomenos encompasses. That’s why some scholars define CSR as an umbrella or fuzzinez term. It can include a wide variety of initiatives, instruments and processes, which corporations put in place to make sure it meets social and moral expectations while pursuing its economic interests. For instance, to some it means legal responsibility or liability, while to others it means socially responsible behavior in an ethical sense, charitable contribution, socially conscious or legitimacy before society.

Secondly, we should address that it has a long history, maybe as long as corporations and business existence: how far back does it takes us? Specialists recognize a possible backstep to ancient history, specifically to Roman empire. Anyway, in a modern sense, could be appropriated to start a discussion since the industrial revolution and the wider evidence of capitalism development and the appearance of business actors gaining prominence in societies. Carroll identifies the first visible manifestations of CSR, businessmen practices, even when the concept wasn’t yet formulated, in the industrial developments under paternalistic or philanthropic practices in the later nineteenth century and at the turn of the century (Carroll, 2009, p. 22).

Bush considers that maybe the origin of modern CSR can be identified in 1908 with the first public campaign pointing at the purchase of cocoa from Portuguese slave labor in Africa. It involved Cadbury Brothers, who were supposed to have known not only the evil of a trade but the obligations of those partaking (Bush, 2015). For him, it should be required the high Victorian conscience of the tools of antitrust and democratic governance, at least. By that time, business leaders began to be exposed to others’ views as to what constituted social problems in society and many authors, like Oliver Sheldon, began to talk in Harvard Business Review about basic corporate responsabilities towards society, trough justice and honesty.

But far away of being a common practice, concentrated economic power was drawn into the hands of a few, and this raised up a corporate ruling class with almost limitless power following what has been later called the principle of “shareholder primacy”, according to which management should think firstly in terms of profit maximization in favor of the shareholder, and avoid a breach of fiduciary duties (Kaeb, 2015, p. 113).

Anyway, the collapse of the economic system, the 1929 crisis, somehow pushed businessmen to turn back toward responsibility and accountability, ending a “profit maximizing management” phase in the development of social responsibility or, from other perspective, the prelegalization or philantropich period of corporate contributions (according to Sophia Muirhead, Carroll, 2009, p. 23), reinforcing the isolated existing practices. By that time, in 1932, took place the famous Berle–Dodd debate, that can be recongnized as a milestone of CSR history, when professor Adolf Berle argued that corporations should exercise their power only for the benefit of their shareholders and then his collegue Merrick Dodd replied that corporations should consider the interests of workers, consumers and community (Deva, 2020).

The phenomenon turned visible in the second post world war, in the fifties, when Howard Bowen wrote Social Responsibilities of the Businessman, aiming to set a concept that link in an indissoluble way the rights of the companies to maximize profits and the obligations before society. The corporations began to be seen as institutions, like the government, that had social obligations to fulfill. After World War II, with the opening of a Cold War period, one of these oblitagions, as is not often mentioned, was to be socially responsible by standing up as an anti-Communist institution (Carroll, 2009, p. 24; For a summarized history of CSR, see Latapí Agudelo et al., 2019). In the 1960s and 1970s, neoliberal economists like Milton Friedman took forward Berle’s views, expressing a clear picture about what, as we will see below, Deva call retrospecvly the era of “business or human rights”.

From then on, CRS developed within the dominant assumption as essentially private responsibility, featuring apolitical character and voluntary nature. One of the most foundational conceptualizations of CSR, Carroll’s 1979 pyramid, is a case in point. He stated four elements for CSR conceptions: economic, legal, ethical and philanthropic, which moves from what is required (formers two) to what is expected and desired (both in a voluntary perspective). By that time, the most relevant societal concerns and expectations of corporate behavior revolved around environmental pollution, employment discrimination, consumer abuses, employee health and safety, quality of work life, deterioration of urban life, and questionable / abusiveness practices of multinational corporations (Carroll, 2009, p. 36).

In this path of growing both, the scale and power of corprations and the attempt to study this power, to create an academic field and also to institutionalize norms and regulations to adress this issue, many policies were developed in Europe and US. For instance, the European Comission created the Directorate-General for the Environment in 1981 and in 1990 the European Environment Agency. A declaration to fight unemployment in 1995 and a European Network of Companies for Social Cohesion preceeded the 2001 Green Paper for promoting a European framework for CSR, where CSR was defined as the voluntary integration of social and environmental concerns, and the 2002 first European CSR strategy (Kaeb, 2015; Latapí Agudelo et al., 2019; Nieto Martín, 2020; Ramasastry, 2015).

In 2005 and 2011, the European Union defined a roadmap for competitive and sustainable corporations and renewed its strategy, defining RSC as the corporate responsabiliy for their impact on society. In 2014, the Directive 2014/95 required large public-interest companies to disclose non-financial and diversity information (sustainability reports) from 2018 onwards, and in 2015, a Business 2020 Manifesto was launched by CSR Europe, seeking to set the direction towards an inclusive and sustainable economy aligned with the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Within all these steps, the 2014 directives meant a significant shift from a voluntary to a forced policie and coupled with domestic context, where governments enacted legislation providing incentives of benefits for companies that engage in positive investment in rights promotion. For Bijlmakers, this directive assumes what EU Commission defined as the responsibility of enterprises for their impacts on society, "potentially sweeping implications in the rights of stakeholders when it comes to the disclosure obligations of corporations" (Bijlmakers, 2018, p. 5), and that should have certain extraterritorial effects (Bijlmakers, 2018, p. 8). For Ramasastry, with the 2011 communication, the EU moved CSR concept much closer to the field of human rights, making explicit recognition and ethical considerations (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 250).

What is important for us is the increasing interest in business men, international organizations and academics, on the CSR field, confronting internal and external critics (such as Freedman’s), even when it reaimed within boundaries of voluntary conception (political responsabilities of business) and even when human rights terminology is hardly used or remained scant and scattered within CSR field (Wettstein, 2020, p. 35).[6](#footnote6) Some scholars like David Vogel show themselves skeptical because CSR can be sustainable only as so long as it continues to add value to corporate success (Carroll, 2009, p. 42; Gilmore, 2015). As so, CSR mindset tried to wide its traditional scope with improving its definitions, approaches, methodology and expectations. As Bush comments, CSR is no longer the exclusive province of mildly liberal business critics, because the boardroom has appropriated it (Bush, 2015). In so, concepts as Corporate Social Performance (CSP), Stakeholder Theory, Business Ethics, Sustainability CSR, Corporate Citizenship or Political CSR, morphed in the mid-2000s and which addresses the role of companies in governance and the provision of public goods in domains traditionally associated with the state.

### Historic Corporate Social Responsibility

As we are going to address not only current corporate deviance practices but also historical ones, it’s interesting to move towards the “political CSR” concept, that allows to Judith Schrempf-Stirling, Guido Palazzo and Robert Phillips present the concept Historic Corporate Social Responsibility within a theoretichal framework that examines how to hold corporations accountable for past activities, even when they were ordered or supervised by former generations of managers. These perspectives depart from the understanding that corporartions are systematically being considered responsible for acts across their entire value chain, extending beyond traditional corporate boundaries, and they are also being held accountable for past harmfull events (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2016).

In reflecting on these reprehensible acts, these authors conceptualize historical damage as past corporate activities that provoke outrage and moral condemne by diverging from institutionalized norms of legitimate and correct conducts. This damage can be enduring, affecting subsequent generations and undermining trust and harming development of entire societies. Consequently, corporations are viewed as “intergenerational moral actors” capable of holding duties derived from past decisions, regardless wether former maganers were involved or not. What matters is that dark past can affect their present legitimacy, seriously threatening their current “licence to operate” and even their “right to exist”.

Wihin this framework, contested narratives are crucial, resting on two dimensions: claiming legitimacy –which stems from the strength of the historical accusation- and corporate commitment –which reflects how companies respond-. The more legitimated actors to challegenge corporate past are specially affected communities, victims of human rights violations such as forced labor, complicity with reppresive regimes, environmental dissasters, monopolistic practices and political control. As this evaluation relies not on universal or moral criteria, but on the social, historical and pragmatic perception of the damage built over time, it is advisable to analyze the conditions under which an accusation can be successful.

When analyzing variables of bussines behaivour, the authors highlight institutional pressure, where companies might felt compelled to obey directives that caused harm or to go into self destruction, thus requiring an analysis of the behaivour itself alongside comparative reactions from other companies. Another variable is the historical consciousness of past actors and the available knowledge –whether businessmen at the time possessed the moral vocabulary, conceptual categories or the emotional sensibility to understand the harmfullness of their actions. For instance, the authors argue it is not possible to evaluate the Medici family’s environmental attitude in the Middle Ages the same way as the East India Company’s slavery operations, given that the latter occurred within a context where public debates on human rights and corruption already existed, including the liberal Adam Smith’s criticism.

The authors also emphasize the importance of consideraing the magnitud and endure of damage. Eventual legal agreements do not neccesarily close the debate, as the legal history of the event becames part of the narrative itself and collective memory can retain the harm. On the other hand, the current context, including social sensibility, extends or narrows the success opportunities for reprehensión, determining whether it can be considered legitimate or not. This situation encompasses new discoveries, updates and resignifications of known events or institutional shifts that influence reception. The history and reputation of actors presenting contested narratives are also important. Finally, what matters is the plausibility of the narrative: how valid and persuasive is the storytelling constructed by critics and historians? This involves assessing whether the claim is sensible, considering what is known about the past and the way the argumentation is constructed and how it is corroborated.

On the other hand, the authors suggest analyzing how companies respond to accusations, dividing these responses into two big categories: limited commitment, representing a defensive strategy, or high commitment, impliying a dialogic strategy. The former group include answers that aim to close the debate and inmediatly protect companies’ reputation, potentially fueling hostile contests. Companies might argue they can’t be held accountable for the past -because due to a lack verifiable connection- or ignore claims, showing a passive attitude, or might deny the narrative or even justify their actions, with an aggressive posture. Regarding the second group, the authors address a reconciliation attitude aimed at fostering organizational learning and transforming the contest in what they call a communicative process. For instance, companies might open their archives, promote independent investigations or provide their own narratives. They can also implement broad reparations and memorial policies, by creating compensation funds for victims, erecting memorials or developing educational programs for employees, workers, and external stakeholders.

In their empirichal anaylisis, authors identify four types of contests: latent, hostile, communicative and open, categorized based on the strategies adopted by critics and companies. The first type tends to dissolve, due to the corporation’s passive stance and the low strength of the claim. The second, implies a more aggressive company attitude (potentially even legal), confronting a more arguable and legitimate claim, that can involve direct and collective actions. The third arises from larger companies’ commitment, where they ackwnowledge moral responsibility and initiate a dialogue with victims and society. This includes opening and financing academic research, establishing compensation funds and participating in reconciliation acts. Even if the initial intensity is high, proactive engagement tends to moderate the conflict in the long term, thereby strengthening companies’ legitimacy. Finally, when confronting a weak claim, companies can also step forward and recognize the conflict, dissolving crisis and enhancing legitimacy.

In this research, the authors value historiographical work, viewing historians as “narrative artists” or “public teachers”, whose performance however cannot escape contrastation, subjectivity and the bounderies of the present. They face the challenge of historical reconstruction, compounded by scarcity and limited access to sources and documents, both official and private, and the risk of destruction. Historians also contend with the danger of believing and accepting public acusations that may be exaggerated or false.

### Apology or Forgetfulness Era?

Claudia Janssen, an expert in organizational rhetoric, corporate memory, and communication crises, considers valuable and uses the concept of Historic Corporate Social Responsibility (HCSR) to examine Volkswagen’s trajectory. She posits that HCSR evolved from CSR and is designed to guide corporations grappling with their problematic pasts, with a perspective of reconciliation, as she believes companies have a moral duty to account for historical injustices. As this past can manifest historical missteps that lead to retrospective trials, creating communicative crises and complex reckonings with past social processes, academics analyze what companies perceive as reputational threats as social struggles for justice and redemption (Janssen, 2013, p. 66).

Reconciliation, in this accountability process, is understood as a collective communication endeavor where victims and perpetrators engage in dialogue to overcome past divisions and transform their relationship towards a “unity in diversity.” However, Janssen identifies various strategies: some are defensive, focusing on avoiding legal and financial responsibility through means like corporate advocacy or even destroying archives. Others are more constructive and promising, moving beyond self-defense to emphasize reparation. In essence, some approaches solely aim to preserve corporate image, while others acknowledge mistakes, seek redemption, apologize, and establish reparation policies to achieve reconciliation through dialogue that prioritizes victims’ needs and dignity, such as remembrance and recognition.

For the cases where companies face their past with a more or less appopiated recognment, Janssen revives the idea of an “apology era”. She outlines four key principles: respecting the memories and identities of victims and their descendants; showing remorse through apologies, reparations, and promises of change; taking accountability for corporate history by sharing both positive and negative information; and committing to justice and the future to prevent the repetition of atrocities.

In this way, the author highlights the bifurcation of corporate attitudes, contrasting the legal contest (retributive, potentially leading to punishment) with silence (amnesty and forgetting). She asserts that a third path exists, centered on reconciliation and acknowledging moral responsibility, irrespective of any legal obligation. This path nourishes what she terms a “corporate memory culture,” which involves cultivating remembrance as part of a company’s identity, actively opposing denial. It progresses from recognition to sustainability as initial actions, like investigations, become permanent policies encompassing archives, memorials, and educational programs. This indicates a transformation in the corporation’s character, linking remorse to current labor justice and human rights practices.

In identifying this path, which she uses to place Volkswagen’s policies regarding forced labor during Nazism, Janssen also observes that this culture can be flawed, unsuccessful, or misused. This occurs if corporations prioritize publicity over genuine reconciliation or if inconsistencies arise between expressed remorse and current corporate conduct. Consequently, she advocates for studying and analyzing these failed cases historically, both in Germany and elsewhere.

Related to this final concern, Sébastien Mena, Jukka Rintamäki, Peter Fleming, and André Spicer have studied corporate irresponsibility events, particularly focusing on corporate strategies of forgetting. Without delving into the human rights field, these authors, specializing in business and memory processes, define corporate irresponsibility as organizational actions or sequential activities over time that cause harm to stakeholders and the environment, whether intentional or not, thereby jeopardizing companies’ legitimacy (Mena et al., 2016). What other authors analyze as historical rhetoric – managing the past as a strategic resource to shape identity or gain competitive advantage (Decker et al., 2021), these authors see forgetting as occurring on one hand due to entropic forces or natural inertia, such as the passage of time creating emotional distance, employee turnover, or the loss of records. On the other hand, it can result from instrumental forgetting, an active process managed by companies aiming to erase an event from collective memory. In this sense, they define collective forgetting as the absence of institutionalized memory or the non-existence of a shared version of the past, viewing forgetting and remembering as two sides of the same selective coin.

These authors call for studying the roles of companies and both internal and external stakeholders, especially the “rememberers” – active members who strive to keep memory alive. These roles must be analyzed diachronically: when the event occurs, through the lens of the damage, media attention, attribution of guilt, and the emergence of initial mnemonic communities; in the subsequent period, when traces of memory, symbols, records, reports, histories, and monuments appear to preserve memory; and in the long term, where natural and forceful forgetting occurs, involving manipulation, silence, oblivion, and the undermining or reconfiguration of memory traces.

In this research, the authors state that the work of memory and forgetfulness has both positive and negative aspects. Positively, it helps construct identities and legitimacies and avoids cognitive overload in the community. Negatively, it poses a risk to the learning process: by forgetting a traumatic event, stakeholder pressure weakens, increasing the probability that harmful past events will recur.

## Business and Human Rights (BHR) framework

### The Movement

In many ways, the fields of CSR and BHR could be deeply related, but in many other ways not only are they not, but they are even going in opposite directions. According to Schrempf-Stirling, Van Buren and Wettstein, BHR history evolved largely from outside of the business and society and CSR’s field (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2022). As we will see later, it emanated from legal discussions on international human rights law. So, as I introduced before, Deva identifies three eras concerning business and human rights. The first one is exclusive and applies with the interjection or. The second one is the era we address now: Business and Human Rights. The third one refers to one that concerns the scholar, who wonders if finally, corporations can do business with human rights (Deva, 2020).

But as we did with CSR, we need to state a definition on this issue. What is BHR? As many scholars agree, it refers to human rights responsibilities of business, considering its respect and protection along corporate value chains, the avoidance of causing or contributing to human rights violations and the driving of remedy for victims (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2022). Wether we can find a strict definition, it’s proper to ask with Wettsetin: what belongs to the BHR history? And answer, also with him, that it it depends how broad and comprehensive we want to be (Wettstein, 2020, p. 35). He proposes consider a wide path, that trace its history as a social movement early in the seventees of the past century, which means that it appeared largely after CSR practices and policies.

The beginning, so, can be found around the early 1970s, already with the engagement of UN, under debates and disagreements that revolved around “rights versus responsibilities”. Wettstein talk about the ‘precursors’ of the BHR discussion and observes that claims came, although fragmented and focalized, from the Global South itself, as the result of an accelerating globalization process and the rise -in number, size and significance – of the modern multinational corporation. By that time, the UN attempted to regulate these coporations’ investments, with the creation of the Center on Transnational Corporations in 1974, very quickly frustrated. More fruitful were the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the ILO Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy, which were all based on the principle of voluntariness.

Wheter can they be characterized as CSR or BHR iniciatives is difficult to establish. For instance, the OECD Guidelines, in their first inception, did not address human rights broadly but instead focused exclusively on labor protections. In parallel, took place the launch of the Sullivan Principle in 1977 to articulate the role of corporations in fighting apartheid in South Africa[7](#footnote7) and the MacBride Principles introduced in 1984 to promote fair employment and non-discrimination by multinational corporations operating in Northern Ireland, related to religious and political discrimination in the workplace (Wettstein, 2020). The continuing of the context of businesses operating in apartheid South Africa and the Bhopal tragedy in India triggered some of the first business and human rights-specific academic contributions both in law and non-law[8](#footnote8), but the UN in 1992 suspending negotiations on the proposed Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporations after two decades of discussions, underscored the end of the first phase.

Taking into account this changes in industry, Kirsch claims, for instance, that historical evidence suggests that pressure from external critics was responsible for the mining industry’s adoption of the discourse of corporate social responsibility and sustainability in the late 1990s (Kirsch, 2015, p. 95). He refers to mobilization of people and opposition in the Papua case of 80s and 90s, specifically to the copper and gold mining company Ok Tedi, where resulting networks comprised of individuals, communities, nongovernmental organizations, experts, lawyers, and others, were formed in a campagins of opposition and benefit from the complementary mobilization of resources, discourses of persuasion, access to power, and forms of leverage deployed by their members. Even when the company tries to work the issue within the CSR field, it can be seen as a case that moves far from its boundaries, when networks become especially effective in challenging transnational corporations, even when the damage made on the river and the ecosystem has been irreversible.

The second phase passes during one decade more or less, starting in midle nineties. The discourse revolved around “voluntary versus binding” regulations. According to Wettstein, it last up to 2011 and are called “formative years”. The expresions of these issues growing are varied: from the 2002 launch of the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre (BHRRC) by Chris Avery and Amnesty International Business Group in the UK to the discussible but very visible 2000 UN Global Compact, an international soft-law initiative for sustainable business.

A remarkable milestone was attempted by that time: the 1998 Sub-Commission’s draft of the “Norms on the Responsibility of Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises with Regard to Human Rights” (kwonw as UN Draft Norms), designed to address corporate human rights responsibility in an exclusive manner and by means of international law (Wettstein, 2020, p. 29). By that time, as we will se below, human rights and civil rights lawyers began to challenge corporate involvement in human rights violations, using the federal Alien Tort Statute to mount cases in US courts with exemplars cases such as Royal-Dutch Shell, Unocal, and Texacom, while others accompanied victims of forced labor during the World War II to suit Swiss banks, European insurers, and German corporations such as Volkswagen or Farben (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 241)

The raising corporations power and its harmfull effects were also increasingly denunciated by human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), that drew attention to the role of companies in conflict zones. For instance, one of the most remarkable was the role of the diamond industry in fueling a bloody armed conflict in Sierra Leone through the purchase of so-called conflict diamonds. This led to the creation of the Kimberley Process, a multistakeholder process involving governments and the diamond industry meant to create clean supply chains and eliminate “conflict diamonds” through certification and tracing. In adittion, as a multistakeholder iniciative, also emerged the “Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights”, which primarily addresses the relationship of extractive companies to security forces and local security (Chella, 2012, p. 45; Rosenblum, 2015, p. 38). By that time, the apparel and footwear industry also came under public scrutiny, involving companies like Nike and Wal-Mart, because of the use of child labor in their supply chains and very poor health and safety conditions (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 242). Different multistakeholder initiatives marked this stage, such as Fair Labor Association (FLA) and Global Network Initiative (GNI), focused on customer data or censorship. Many of these inicitaives driven by EU and US tried to replace a regulatory law or the sanction of binding treaties. For Ramasastry, by that time, BHR wasn’t still a true “movement” but more a set of emerging crises where companies and governments scrambled to respond once their connections to human rights abuses were made public (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 242). As Walker-Said comments, understanding the origins of neoliberal engineering is not only crucial for locating the simultaneous beginnings of international human rights activism but also for identifying when corporate practices marked by impaired moral judgment were codified and transmitted internationally (Walker-Said, 2015, p. 9).

In 2005, the attempt of the UN Draft Norms was suppressed, under another iniciative: the creation of the UN Special Representative to the Secretary General (SRSG), under John Ruggie, to reach a new and soft agreement within UN. The mandate lasted until 2011, when report became the UN Guiding Principles ‘Protect, Respect, and Remedy Framework’ that were unanimously endorsed by the UN Human Rights Council and went into force. While for Wettstein the 2011 report and endorsement ends the second phase and opens the third one, for Deva, the whole stage of the UN SRSG and up to 2014, when an open-ended UN Working Group on BHR (UNWG) was tasked with supporting and advancing the dissemination and implementation process of the UNGPs, and to elaborate an international legally binding instrument, was a phase in itself.

Nevertheless, what the UN SRSG did and what is called the Ruggie Framework, was to develop a set of guiding principles for both governments and companies outlining basic responsibilities in regard to human rights: companies must respect –not to violate– and states must protect, the former opening expectations and the later directly derived from international human rights law. Along with respect and protection, both states and businesses ought to help improve access to remedy. As Wettstein argues, the settlement of the guiding principles opened the ‘maturing’ of the debate, wich encompases the broader social movement, the institutional evolution and the academic discussion on business and human rights (Wettstein, 2020, p. 30). For Kaeb, instead of going back to a mere philanthropic or voluntary understanding of CSR, the current UN framework features a mixed implementation approach that leverages the potential of soft law but aims to strengthen judicial and nonjudicial accountability mechanisms in the long run (Kaeb, 2015, p. 117). In this process, international legal scholars have remained the dominant force in the academic discussion but the field became more interdisciplinary, attracting contributions from various related fields such as CSR, business ethics and international relations.

The open-ended UN Working Group on BHR (UNWG) that replaced Ruggie’s mandate published a draft in 2019 that is still revised, discussin the creation of a treaty, the so-called binding instrument, which declares that corporations are bound by Human Rights in a similar way to States, in that their power and capacity to affect them is similar. This claim implies that companies would not only have the negative obligation, like any person, not to negatively affect them (respect), but they would also be positively obliged to prevent and protect within the framework of their activity (Nieto Martín, 2020). In the while, an annual UN Forum on BHR in Geneva has been iniciated, accompanied by the foundation of Business and Human Rights Journal in 2015 and the Global Business and Human Rights Scholars Association in 2017. In adittion, a number of states have released so-called National Action Plans (NAPs) on BHR and many more are in the process of doing so or have considered first steps in that direction.[9](#footnote9)

Furthermore, the most momentous and impactful developments are currently happening at the regional and domestic level, in order to entail a corporate obligation either to implement a human rights due diligence process or to report on how business addresses human rights challenges and to unfolding extraterritorial impacts along their global supply chains, even though the development of actions targeting corporate responsibility for human rights abuses has been marked by a profound normative asymmetry between the strength of Global Commercial Law (which protects corporate interests) and the fragility of international oversight systems (Zubizarreta, 2009).

As we stated above, the EU, despite its rather obstructive role in the treaty negotiations, expanded a regime of binding legislation around the topic. For instance, the non-financial reporting directive will mandate large corporations of more than 500 employees to report on how they manage social and environmental challenges. As mentioned above, a second piece of landmark regulation is the EU regulation on conflict minerals, which came into force fully in 2021.[10](#footnote10) In the case of Organization of American States (OAS), it has adopted a distinct strategy, focusing on State obligations, thereby overcoming the obstacles of classical law: the Inter-American System mandates states to guarantee human rights with imposing a duty of due diligence to prevent, oversee, investigate, and sanction violations committed by private actors. Otherwise, there would be international responsibility of the State. This advance doesn’t discard requirement for corporations to have direct and binding obligations within the domestic legal systems, as reflectes in the work of the Inter-American Juridical Committee and in the specialized reports of the IACHR, where is the Special Rapporteur on Economic, Social, Cultural and Environmental Rights (REDESCA), considers that the NAPs should not be a substitute for the obligation of regulatory adaptation that is binding on States (Relatoría Especial sobre Derechos Económicos Sociales Culturales y Ambientales, Comisión Interamericana de Derechos Humanos, 2019).

At the country level, France, for instance, passed a ground-breaking Duty of Vigilance Law for the largest companies in the country and the Netherlands has passed a similar law limited to the issue of child labour. The UK, on the other hand, passed a Modern Slavery Act and the US, as part of its Dodd–Frank Act, has established mandatory due diligence in connection with the import of conflict minerals (Nieto Martín, 2020).

### The judicial path

Despite the fact that no corporate legal duty yet exists with respect to human rights, there have been increasing efforts to provide effective legal remedies for corporate infringements at the domestic level in different parts of the world. According to Wettstein, the very real struggle of victims of corporations’ human rights abuse has been crucially about legal redress and access to justice from the start (Wettstein, 2020). This judicial path partially emerges from an exchange with CSR field, but it also communicates in a not so clearly way with BHR movement. Somehow, some cases of litigation can be clearly identified with BHR movement, but many others explored no related paths or they are some kind of unfolded develop from the more classic human rights movements. Many times, it departed from human rights movements and adopted transitional justice instruments locally, but in other cases use more traditional justice structures, such a civil court in US.

We follow Ruti Teitel to define Transitional Justice (TJ) as the set of mechanisms—including trials, truth commissions, and reparations—that analyze the political options of regimes emerging from armed conflicts or authoritarian governments to achieve accountability, stability, and democratization. According to this author, the field has evolved through three distinct phases: an initial phase with the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals following World War II; a phase of deepening at the end of the 20th century, marked by the collapse of the Soviet Union and political transitions in Latin America and Eastern Europe; and a current phase of expansion and normalization, where transitional justice has transitioned from being the exception to becoming the norm (Miller, 2008; Teitel, 2002).

So, departing from the very beginning, we have to go back to the industrialist’s crimes during the II World War in the context of Nazism. The prosecution of these corporate actors has two moments: the Nuremberg Trials and, four decades after, the prosecution before civil courts in US. When we talk about the Nuremberg trials, we meant the four-power International Military Tribunal (IMT), but specifically five later trials, four brought against economic actors by the United States in Nuremberg and one by France under an identical theory at Rastatt. The defendants were four dozen leaders of six German firms, Flick, I. G. Farben, Krupp, Roechling, Hermann Goering Works and Dresdner Bank. The acts charged as crimes against humanity, war crimes, conspiracy, and crimes against peace, were slave labor, plunder, prewar takeover of Jewish- and Czech-owned plants, unconsented human experimentation, manufacture of poison gas and participation in the illegal rearmament for aggressive war (Bush, 2015).

The result of these trials, while not as transcendental as subsequently desired, were, in 1947, twenty-three employees of the major German chemical and pharmaceutical manufacturer I.G. Farben indicted for plunder, slavery, and complicity in aggression and mass murder. This was the first time that a court attempted to impose liability on a group of persons who were collectively in charge of a company. The excecutives were convicted and Farben was portrayed as the instrumentality through which the individual actors were able to collectively engage in criminal acts (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 106). In the Krupp case, it is the actions of the enterprise rather than individual defendants that appears criminal. Even when the Tribunal couldn’t persecute legal persons (legal entities), it was concluded that the Krupp firm had an “ardent desire” to employ forced labor. An interesting result was achieved in the Roechling case. A Nuremberg military tribunal convicted a German ironworks executive for failing to prevent or punish the brutalization of forced laborers by factory police (Gilmore, 2015). In the case of the trial of employees of the Japanese Nippon Mining Company for their actions at the Kinkaseki Mine in Formosa, something similar was probed and stated: the liability was posed over the individuals, but the company was carachterized with a main role and directives were condemned because their authority in the company (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 113).

Regarding the substance of the norms extracted from the indictments and judgments, businessmen shalt not have done many of the practices realized and they shalt known the delictual features and negative consecuences of the proceedements (Bush, 2015, p. 133). Even when prosecutors lost many of the economic cases and there were a majority of acquittals and dismissals, no court accepted the full-on formulation that business actors couldn’t be bound by emerging international law that wasn’t yet part of domestic law. Specially that convinced Bush to say that prosecutors won in the court of history, making space for these offenses in public memory (Bush, 2015, p. 137). Rasasmastry stated before that this reminded the public that the Nazis prosecuted included German industrialists. That doesn’t erase the fact that economic and geopolitical reasons lead the four powers to manage in different ways the business behavior, imposing a limit of real accountability for industrialists and no decisive precedent for entity liability. For Bush, it was clear that it was more important sosteining the big companies, by trying a few individuals and overseeing new executives. So, it was always the difficulty of establishing the direct legal responsibility of corporations as legal entities (Comisión Internacional de Juristas, 2008).

Somehow, judicial developments particularly in the US paved the way in the ninetees, during the formation of BHR era, to bring lawsuits against corporations violating human rights in their foreign operations and some high profile ‘pilot’ cases involving prominent companies. So here again, the crimes of industrialists of the II World War led the path. Holocaust-era cases were brought at the same time as the other corporate Alien Tort Statute (ATS) cases but were litigated by lawyers with no expertise in international human litigation. These trials were held by victims that sued the companies before civil courts.

In 1999, the first slave labor action filed in the United States was against the American car manufacturer Ford Motor Company, benefited from the use of forced labor by its German subsidiary, Ford Werke A.G. in Nazi Germany. In this case, the named plaintiff was Elsa Iwanowa, a Belgian citizen and resident, who alleged that she was abducted and performed unpaid “forced labor under inhuman conditions for Ford”, with approximately two thousand other children from 1942 to 1945 in its Cologne plant. The complaint states that in 1943, 25% of Ford Werke's workforce was unpaid forced labor. By 1944 the percentage of unpaid laborers had allegedly grown to 50%. Ford Werke A.G. was one of 51 German companies to use Auschwitz internees as slave laborers.

Even when the Holocaust related cases were dismissed on grounds of nonjusticiability, and also because the statute of limitations, according to the court, had expired, it accepted jurisdiction over the case and acknowledged the facts, exerting pressure on German industry to participate in the slave labor fund (Janssen, 2013; Ramasastry, 2002, p. 121). Something similar happened with litigation against Japanese mining corporation for the use of Korean, Chinese civilian and prisioners of war slave labor, under a special law enacted by the California Legislature in 1999, ATS and under various state laws and customary international law (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 129).

As nowadays no international criminal tribunal has jurisdiction over corporate entities, and only a handful of corporate officers have ever stood in the dock for atrocity crimes, Nuremberg still talks (Gilmore, 2015, p. 182) and allows scholars urge the relevance of landmark trials examining business wrongs and encouraged to bring cases under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) (Bush, 2015, p. 128), a civil law that allow victims and advocates look for corporate responsibility in United States when it has never prosecuted a corporate actor under its torture, war crimes, or genocide statutes.

Ramasastry brings many of these cases, such as the sued filed against Coca-Cola and two Florida investors, where the United Steel Workers Union and the International Labor Rights Fund partnered with a Colombian trade union accused the company for supporting death squads as part of a strategy to intimidate trade union leaders, or the Unocal case opened in 1996, significant because it was the first lawsuit in which a court acknowledged that a multinational corporation –the Californian oil company- could be liable for violations of international law, where the Myanmar’s military allegedly enslaved the local population, evacuated villages, executed some resistors and engaged in other criminal acts, monetary supported (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 146). The Unocal case finished with an out of court settlement, becoming a driver for CSR. Something similar happened with exemplars cases such as Royal-Dutch Shell and Texaco (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 241). The ATS promised to put the “risk” in human rights risk management, with massive money judgments and the public relations costs of trial becoming powerful incentives for companies to police themselves to prevent abuses.

Nevertheless, the ATS results were unsatisfactories because of some federal court decisions, but also because of three continued decisions handed down between 2012 and 2014 by the US Supreme Court. As Gilmore claimed, the US Supreme Court gutted the decades-long effort to hold multinationals civilly liable under the Alien Tort Statute for atrocities committed around the world (Gilmore, 2015, p. 176). Two of them, related to companies’ cases: Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., a case concerning the alleged complicity of Shell Oil in Nigerian military abuses, where the court severely restricted the circumstances in which the ATS could apply to abuses committed overseas; and Daimler AG v. Bauman, where the court dismissed an ATS suit brought by Argentine plaintiffs against a German parent company, alleging that its Argentine subsidiary had collaborated with the dictatorial regime during the “Dirty War.” Beyond these cases, in Giraldo v. Drummond, an ATS case accusing an Alabama mining company of complicity in Colombian paramilitary violence, a district court held that command responsibility only applies to military leaders or civilian defense authorities—not to private business executives.

In paralell, back to the more specific transitional justice mechanism, in the 2000s decade, in an international scenario, the UN Tribunal for Rwanda convicted the director of a tea factory and the senior management of a radio station for failing to prevent or punish their employees’ genocidal or persecutory acts. These sentences constitued the first international processs after Nuremberg in judging businessmen (Michalowski et al., 2022).Somehow, it was a renascens in the international criminal law for economics actors after almost fifty years. Many examples show that international pressure for corporate accountability occurs. Several criminal cases have been filed in European jurisdictions accusing companies of complicity in human rights crimes committed abroad. But it is also aprehensible, as Payne et all stated that the Appeals Chamber in Rwanda sentences delinked in the criminal acts from the corporate practices involved, focusing in the individual participation, it meas, from corporate accountability to certain economic actors’ accountability for inciting genocide (Payne et al., 2020, pp. 76–77). In a global perspective and related with criminal law, several EU states, notably Spain, have limited their courts’ jurisdiction over international crimes when talking about corporate massive crimes and United States has never prosecuted a corporation or its officers for a human rights crime (Gilmore, 2015, p. 184).

When analyzing this controvertible develop, syncretic and syncronich develop with BHR movement, Miller observed what she calls the the invisibility of the economic dimension in investigations and, more generally, in policies that examine human rights violations under democratic regimes and in situations of civil war or armed conflict (Miller, 2008). Her study is particularly interesting because it draws attention to the absence of an actor she regards as central to explaining processes of extreme violence. By concentrating on direct or indirect complicity in acts of immediate physical violence, but also on processes of structural inequality, exploitation and systemic violence, the author highlights the limitations of the traditional human rights approach, thereby building a bridge with the business literature, which identifies a wide range of forms of corporate harm. Is in tha sense, not focusing on BHR or CSR fields, that she claims that the legal framework of Nuremberg has rather helped to invisibilizate than collaborate with socio-economic rights, allowing the role of corporations and elites in economic oppression to remain unpunished and outside the official narrative of “justice”.

Miller argues that the invisibility of the economy in transitional justice processes refers to the historical exclusion, both in the literature and in institutions, of issues such as economic inequality, structural violence, redistribution and development. These issues have been removed or suppressed through three main patterns: ignoring such problems altogether; treating inequality or structural violence as mere background context rather than central themes for the transition; and reducing economic concerns to a narrow discussion of reparations. In the literature, this occurs, for example, through silence or superficial references that do not delve into structural factors, often due to a form of “legalism” that narrows the understanding of the instruments of transitional justice. In institutions, this is reflected in the mandates of courts and commissions, which tend to place greater emphasis on civil and political rights than on socio‑economic rights, following the bias of traditional human rights discourse. In reparation policies, by reducing the “economic” to individual monetary transactions, the absence of any large‑scale redistribution of wealth is concealed.

For the author, an analysis of the “economy” in these processes must be carried out with a chronological orientation: first, by examining the economic roots and consequences of the conflict that is to be narrated and judged; second, by studying the process of economic liberalisation that often accompanies political transition, which typically involves a lack of significant redistribution of resources in the new state; and finally, by analysing future development plans. When these variables are examined along these dimensions, the main problem that emerges is the construction of the myth that the origins of the conflict are political or ethnic, rather than grounded in the economy or resources. This, in turn, suggests that inequality is merely a matter of time or development, and not a deeply rooted ideology of the elites. Moreover, by ignoring the role of multinational corporations and structural imbalances, these are made to appear irrelevant in comparison with internal violence.

With these “sins of omission”, the past is narrowed and the narrative about the role of companies and the economic system is carefully adjusted at a moment of “transition” that is meant to represent rupture and discontinuity, so as to close it by asserting that the new social and economic reality is different from that of the past. In response, she argues, it is necessary to expose and untangle existing biases and their effects, and to pay attention to how invisibility was constructed in the past in order to prevent ideological interests from continuing to shape reconstruction priorities in the future.

The author’s call in 2008 is interesting because it reveals a growing concern that has indeed been reflected in some transitional justice policies worldwide after her article publication, some of which we discuss in this article below. No talking only about BHR development, as we saw with global iniciatives, but also in local developments, where transitional justice mechanisms were created and with advanced proposals for thinking about corporate violence is put forward, like Saad-Diniz’s Corporate Transitional Justice mechanism, who adopts principles of corporate criminology to consider transitional justice policies, building on the shift from social responsibility to corporate political responsibility, but proposing a peculiar instance: a special field of corporate transitional justice (Saad-Diniz, 2020). It is relevant to highlight that Brazil has special labor justice institutions, such as federal courts and a public labor ministry.

“It is only in the first decade of the twenty-first century that advocacy networks have started to consistently press for business accountability for gross human rights violations. This new cause emerged as a consequence of a number of processes. First, in the context of accelerated globalization and the growing power of corporations in the 1990s, an increasing number of actors (states and NGOs) have started to call for the regulation of corporate behaviour in various fields.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 4)

“TANs working for this cause encounter a series of legal and political difficulties. International norms concerning the duty of business to respect human rights are currently soft-law, voluntary principles rather than enforceable obligations.15 Corporations as legal entities are not bound by international criminal law (ICL), although their representatives can face individual trials for complicity in international crimes. Some national jurisdictions permit civil litigations and even criminal trials against corporations as such, but there is not enough legal practice to amount to jus cogens.16” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 5)

“El estudio contribuye así a una floreciente literatura sobre la complicidad empresarial. Desde la pionera Comisión Internacional de Juristas sobre la Complicidad de las Empresas y el volumen editado por Michalowski5, estudios de diferentes disciplinas se han enfocado principalmente en dos elementos interrelacionados: la responsabilidad de las empresas por las violaciones de los derechos humanos cometidas en dictaduras y conflictos armados6 y los esfuerzos por responsabilizar a los actores económicos mediante mecanismos de la justicia transicional7.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 31)

Al examinar estos procesos “desde abajo”, el artículo discute los supuestos de dos cuerpos de bibliografía: la justicia transicional y las empresas y los derechos humanos. La literatura sobre justicia transicional se ha centrado casi exclusivamente en la violencia ejercida por las fuerzas del Estado y sus aliados paramilitares o grupos rebeldes, ignorando a menudo el papel de los actores económicos. Además, tiende a enfatizar el papel de los actores internacionales para explicar los resultados de la rendición de cuentas13 (Igual que Miller aquí)

“La bibliografía sobre empresas y derechos humanos investiga los patrones “actuales” de violaciones de derechos o bien cómo prevenirlos15. Examina los sectores de la industria, en qué conjunto de países o regiones se producen estas violaciones, y las políticas y prácticas empresariales, estatales o mundiales que más pueden prevenirlas o reducirlas. Estos estudios también han dejado una laguna: tienden a pasar por alto las pautas de los abusos empresariales durante gobiernos autoritarios y en conflictos armados. Además, el camino hacia la rendición de cuentas se ha centrado en los litigios transnacionales en los tribunales del Norte Global, dado que estos procesos “de abajo hacia arriba” (tal cual los denomina la literatura sobre empresas y derechos humanos a la que hacemos referencia aquí)16 en esas poderosas instituciones son los que tienen más probabilidades de lograr que las empresas rindan cuentas y de hacer avanzar las normas sobre empresas y derechos humanos a nivel global17.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 32)

Este es el enfoque de la Palanca de Arquímedes: que incluso los actores débiles (las víctimas del Sur Global) pueden, trabajando con las herramientas adecuadas (innovadores institucionales), levantar el peso del mundo (romper con la impunidad corporativa) venciendo a los actores de veto pro-empresariales, incluso sin el apoyo adicional de actores internacionales o extranjeros.

CATJ “Los procesos judiciales incluyen juicios penales internacionales, juicios civiles y penales extranjeros y juicios civiles y penales nacionales37, documentando un total de 104 esfuerzos en cada tipo de tribunal y en cada región del mundo” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 36) la mayoría en Argenitna y colombia (45) sacar porcentaje

“La CATJ muestra, contra las suposiciones de la literatura sobre justicia transicional y empresas y derechos humanos, un dinamismo en los tribunales nacionales del Sur Global, que no se registra en los tribunales internacionales, regionales o poderosos del Norte Global. Aunque se presentaron casos ante estos tribunales, pocos obtuvieron resultados. Los que lo hicieron se resolvieron extrajudicialmente, sin llegar ninguno a sentencias definitivas. Mientras que la impunidad empresarial es la norma en los tribunales internacionales y extranjeros, se observa un mayor dinamismo en los tribunales nacionales, donde se han iniciado investigaciones judiciales e incluso se ha llegado a sentencias definitivas” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 36)

“Sin embargo, este dinamismo en los tribunales nacionales no refuta la existencia de una norma de impunidad empresarial.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 37) “Sólo la mitad de los casos iniciados llegaron a una sentencia definitiva, y una cuarta parte acabó en absolución o sobreseimiento. La otra cuarta parte sigue pendiente” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 37)

“Los innovadores institucionales, en particular los innovadores legales, que traducen las demandas de la sociedad civil en acciones legales, también son fundamentales para hacer avanzar los casos a lo largo del continuo.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 42) Esta innovación jurídica es aún más importante para la rendición de cuentas de las empresas, debido a la falta de obligaciones internacionales de derechos humanos claras, vinculantes y aplicables a las empresas o estableciendo obligaciones especiales de los Estados para establecer responsabilidades a las empresas

“Siguiendo a Tsebelis70, los actores de veto en nuestro análisis son aquellos actores corporativos capaces de bloquear las iniciativas de rendición de cuentas. No son “saboteadores”71 que bloquean la democracia o los procesos de paz, sino que utilizan las instituciones democráticas y los procesos de paz posteriores a la transición para desplegar estrategias que mantengan el statu quo de impunidad.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 44)

“two TANs concerned with corporate accountability for gross human rights violations in Latin America construct a cause based on their respective professional backgrounds and skills and their political visions. While driven by the same values and goals, namely to combat impunity and regulate corporate behaviour in terms of human rights, these networks do nonetheless propose different pro-accountability strategies that indirectly challenge each other. ECCHR, CELS and CAJAR promote a retributive model of justice based on national and transnational criminal trials and consider alternative TJ instruments, particularly truth commissions, to be “soft justice” with little deterrence effect. They address crimes committed by major multinational corporations and bring cases to national, foreign and international courts in an attempt to establish legal precedents and new jurisprudence at a global level. In their view, only binding norms and enforced judicial decisions can truly correct corporate wrongdoing.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 17) “In contrast, LAC, ANDHES and Dejusticia see criminal justice as a weak instrument per se to achieve integral reparations and produce in-depth accounts about corporate complicity in dictatorial violence and armed conflict. They also underline the limited efficacy of transnational litigations and focus on initiatives in the domestic sphere, where they seek to consolidate and improve already existing jurisprudence and TJ instruments. For this network, civil litigations and truth commissions at the local level appear to be a more flexible and suitable means than (transnational) criminal trials to achieve both compensation for victims and the compilation of a historical record that would acknowledge not only the responsibility of individual economic actors, but also the liability of the companies themselves.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 18)

Specifically, Saad-Diniz proposes Corporate Transitional Justice (CTJ) as a new analytical category within the criminal sciences to develop a “theoretical key” for organizing research on the links between corporate complicity and authoritarian dynamics, facilitating new strategic recommendations for practical action and post-conflict social reconstruction. In this sense, and in light of Miller’s claims, the proposal might be obscured by limiting harmful corporate action to the term “complicity” and an external relationship with authoritarian regimes, without observing the criminal dynamics established within democracies and other regimes, as well as non-democratic cultures internal to companies.

Saad-Diniz’s proposal, however, contributes to systematizing a demand: to complete the “big picture” of criminological thought, which often ignores the prominence of corporate criminality, especially the financial and institutional support provided by economic groups to authoritarian regimes that continue to lead strategic market sectors. In this way, the author also builds a bridge from the present: by observing the striking affinity between recent corporate scandals (like Operation Lava Jato in Brazil) and the business networks that supported the past authoritarian regime, revealing an indifference to democratic commitment and a moral void in the national market. That is, corporate transitional justice is not limited to the past regime but is defined by a continuity with the present, in order to strengthen future democratic resilience.

Agreeing with the broad strokes of Miller’s historical analysis, the author argues that the corporate actor was “invisible” in transitional justice due to Cold War dynamics, where economic reconstruction was prioritized over corporate accountability. Original transitional justice focused on political dimensions and state atrocities, neglecting economic complicity, so the field now demands filling that void in the “new generation” of transitional studies. For this, criminology requires a specialization of historical research, where the main complications include companies’ lack of will and compliance, for instance, in their refusal to voluntarily open their archives (voluntary disclosure), which obstructs the search for historical truth and forces reliance on testimonies or indirect evidence of low informational density.

Saad-Diniz addresses two key issues related to the identification and conceptualization of corporate legal responsibility (liability) and forms of accountability. On one hand, he analyzes how complicity has been described and theorized, whether direct, indirect (or by benefit), and by silence, warning that he believes there is a lack of precision in legal doctrine to distinguish legitimate business activity from illicit activity, especially in “neutral actions,” including a specific analysis of “corporate mens rea” (corporate intent) to better characterize these practices. On the other hand, he argues that traditional legal measures (such as fines or naming and shaming) are insufficient if not linked to historical memory: “Reparation, beyond financial compensation, must communicate a broader, deeper, and humanistic historical sense; reparation is accountability; it is, ultimately, the experimentation of new strategies for the realization of historical memory.” (Saad-Diniz, 2020, p. 115). That is, legal sanctions are based on coercion, intimidation, and formal reproach by the legal system, which alone can alienate accountability, as they do not always expose complex truths. But there is a moral sanction that refers to “moral accountability,” which implies the spontaneous recognition of a lack of integrity, loss of reputation before society, and the moral obligation to acknowledge the role played in the past to regain legitimacy. This latter aspect, according to the author, allows for more effective dialogue with victims and more concrete symbolic reparation, an authentic recognition of the harm by corporations.

In relation to historiographical practice, the author posits that corporate transitional justice presupposes a detailed and historiographical analysis of each case of corporate responsibility. Ultimately, it is necessary to better understand the “routinization of aggressiveness” and ambition in the corporate world, or to dimension the extent of socially harmful corporate behavior more consistently. In essence, it stems from the need for an “ethical commitment” that must be combined with a “democratic historical commitment,” by accounting for the “historical continuity of complicity” avoiding “washing away” a reality of corruption in Latin America. “There are a number of unrecognized injustices that should form the basis for an ethical review of business integrity in Latin America” (Saad-Diniz, 2020, p. 125).

It’s worthly to mention, aiming as Ramasastry to find the way to criminalize corporations for their crimes, a proposition borned specifically from economic criminology field, focusing on purely economic crimes or departing from legal human rights perspectives, in this case, concerned with innovating legal and punitive schemes against corporations as legal entities. Even when it is not an isolated proposal (Arenal Lora, 2019; Barbuto, 2018; Chella, 2012; Comisión Internacional de Juristas, 2008; Naucke, 2015), Nieto Martín has recently drawn attention to the limits of international economic criminal law and the need to incorporate a specific human rights perspective, based on the initiatives undertaken by the European Union, of which we have already talked (Nieto Martín, 2020).

According to this author, international economic criminal law was born with Nuremberg and its function consists of establishing the responsibility of business leaders and executives for serious human rights violations. Since the historic trials, international criminal law has addressed the responsibility of managers and employees in a topical manner, based on the construction of four groups that graduate the company’s involvement in the facts: direct participation of employees or managers, complicity, benefits, and silence or omission. In the debate, the author raises the need –as Ramasastry does- to incorporate the criminal liability of legal persons and to ensure that a large part of what is framed today as Corporate Social Responsibility becomes part of regulatory compliance.

At the same time, he advances the need to establish a new generation of international criminal law offenses whose main actors are corporations. Concerning sanctions, international criminal law should embrace approaches derived from restorative justice, if not directly propose the use of restorative justice mechanisms based on diversion. Ultimately, the proposals point toward the creation of a new branch of economic criminal law, centered on the protection of human rights, whose purpose would be to sanction the violation of state or supranational norms intended to regulate business activity in order to prevent human rights violations.

With the same concern between eyebrows, Gilmore demands the use of a specific theory for taking corporations as natural persons into accountability processes. He talks about the command responsibility doctrine, that offers a regulatory model that leverages sanctions to induce businesses to adopt cultures of compliance (Gilmore, 2015, p. 176). Commanders -he states- can be prosecuted if they knew, or should have known, that their subordinates were committing crimes and they failed to make reasonable efforts to prevent the abuses or punish the perpetrators. “In companies, as in armies, the lines of controlbetween managers and employees, entities and officers, and parents and subsidiaries—should define the lines of liability”, he writes (Gilmore, 2015, p. 177).

His comparative proposition underlines a feature of life corporations that is not always sufficiently mentioned: the autoritarism corporate culture. Claiming for the recognment of a shared historical common nucleus between companies and armies, he looks for a transmision of the use of this doctrine from the federal white-collar criminal law and regulatory public welfare infractions, that has long imputed criminal responsibility up the chain of command under the “responsible corporate officer” doctrine to violent felonies. Even further, he claims for extending the command responsibility to the corporation itself, a tradition that is not absent in Anglo-American and Continental law (Gilmore, 2015, p. 188).

These later propositions adress exactly Ramastry's rescued questions: Why penalize a corporate actor when nations and international tribunals have the ability to prosecute individual employees for wrongdoing? Sanctioning them with fines, criminal prosecution, and even prohibiting future business operations may provide a greater deterrent for their behaivour? If individuals may be prosecuted and removed from a corporation, will the corporate entity continues to exist and might continue its misconduct? (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 96).

### Key definitions

These developments—spanning the global and local, the management, legal or criminological academic discourses—have brought about several complexities. The most significant among them concerns about how to define the actor that is under the spotlight: corporations.

The United Nations Guiding Principles establish that their standards apply to “all business enterprises, both transnational and others, regardless of their size, sector, location, ownership, and structure.” (Oficina del Alto Comisionado de las Naciones Unidas para los Derechos Humanos, 2011, p. 1). But, still, what’s the meaning and scope of the term “enterprise”? Does it refer solely to the responsibility of the economic unit as a legal entity or does it involve the actions of individuals linked to a specific legal person, or even those who conduct economic activities without constituting a special legal entity for business management? The draft of the Proposed Treaty on Business and Human Rights, tried to approach certainty: “business activities” are defined as “any economic activity, for profit or otherwise, undertaken by a natural or legal person, including state-owned enterprises, transnational corporations, other business enterprises, and joint ventures.” In this sense, “private sector” or “economic actors” can be considered synonyms.

Also, the academic literature has coined the term “corporate responsibility.” Terminology, specifically regarded to responsibility, organizes what seems a word game, but drives a distinctive approach related to different fields, because BHR and law tradition will prefer to use terms such as complicity in the realm of liability and legal accountability. CSR field and also historic approaches would prefer to use responsibility rather than judicial terminology. And that regards also to what from a historical and even ethicall perspective can be seen as a limit from the law: the charges for complicity may dissolve or attenuate what seems to be a very direct concern, interest and participation of companies in the violent processs. For these reasons, for instance, the official report about business and dictatorship in Argentina was intittled with the term responsibility (Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación et al., 2015).

If we stand in the law field, stablishing liability as the form of accountability, we posit on the term “corporate complicity”, that is widely used to describe the assistance or participation of economic actors in serious human rights violations (including genocide, torture, crimes against humanity, and war crimes) committed by the State or state-like agents (e.g., paramilitaries or rebel forces with territorial control) during situations of authoritarianism or civil conflict. But complicity can be addressed as a broader term. Payne et al, define corporate complicity, firstly, as direct complicity in criminal violence (e.g., joint criminal enterprise and conspiracy to violence); secondly, specific gross human rights violations with regard to labor (e.g., slave or forced labor); thirdly, financing repression, crimes against humanity, or war crimes are forms of indirect complicity in violence (e.g., bank loans to sanctioned regimes, or odious debt); and finally, corporate complicity results from enterprises or individuals engaged in illegal activity that knowingly procure or profit from, and thereby perpetuate, violence (e.g., trading in “conflict minerals”). Acoording to this scheme, these four areas fall within transitional justice’s remit (Payne et al., 2020, p. 4). In parallel, Ramasastry defines complicity as situations in which a multinational company “aids and abets” a host government in the commission of serious abuses, and argues that legal liability arises when knowledge of violations is combined with acceptance of direct economic benefit and continued association with the repressive government. Then, she classifies complicity into three levels: direct (conscious assistance); indirect or beneficiary (the company is not the perpetrator but benefits from the abuses linked to the project); and by silence or inaction, the most difficult to bind legally and usually remains at the level of the moral obligation to report systemic abuses (Ramasastry, 2002, pp. 101–103).

In this sequence, we move from responsibility, to accountability –as a intermediate term- and later to liability. From a scheme of private and voluntary structures in which businesses play the leading role, to public control. Developing the thoughts, this is what Ramasastry considers the shift of perspective from CSR to BHR, as fundamental differences in the basic assumptions informing the two discussions. Specifically, she states that at the current juncture, the BHR movement is drifting further away from CSR and the role of companies as voluntary and affirmative contributors to human rights realization. For her, the quest for accountability takes the narrative for BHR more into the realm of binding law, state sponsored oversight, and the importance of access to remedy as a measure of corporate accountability (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 238). Onto this dilemma, Wettstein sees that an accountability framework goes hand in hand with BHR perspective, that advocates for an extension of corporate responsibility into the public realm and thus for a reinterpretation of corporate responsibility as inherently public in nature, than CSR perspective that claims into the realm of private responsibility (Wettstein, 2020, p. 39).

So, these visions made us make some statements as key definitions, that rest on the shoulders of main questions, such as if corporates obligations to respect human rights should be binding law or voluntary principles, not only but specifically when these violations become international crimes, such as genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or slavery-like conditions. As Gilmore states, we are talking about the struggle crystallized into two competing—and often mutually exclusive—visions of corporate responsibility: the power of penalties or the power of socialization, the former that invokes a penal code, and the later that invokes an honor code. A binary binary vision that this author assure can be overcome if judicial path –even if it hasn’t become a promisory address policy- could enforced both fields, BHR and CSR, specially the later. Gilmore states that more than punish deviants, law and trials can shape institutional cultures, fusing sanctions and socialization, departing from organizational theorists that have long recognized that leaders within a decision-making hierarchy shape the normative expectations and behaviors of an organization’s members (Gilmore, 2015, p. 189). As he reconstructs, backgrounds in US can be found a century ago, when Supreme Court situated corporate guilt in the tort notion of respondeat superior, where a corporation may be held vicariously liable as a principal for the crimes of its agents, so long as the agents acted within the scope of their employment and to the benefit the company (Gilmore, 2015, p. 188). In this historical development, Nuremberg is seen (but also ATS arguments) as asserting a set of binding economic norms and legal theories that were rarely rejected and are available for CSR proponents (Bush, 2015, p. 128). That doesn’t mean that CSR can avoid featuring lack of legal sanctions to incentivize and ensure compliance, because by focusing on voluntarism, CSR has minimized—and perhaps delegitimized—government enforcement of public values on private industry (Gilmore, 2015, p. 182).

But it is not only about judicial path (criminal or civil liability). It’s in a more general sense about law. Kaeb specifically focuses CSR is at the intersection of law, business, ethics, and development, stating that the increasing number of domestic laws prescribing corporate liability for international crimes traces back, in part, to the increase in international and regional agreements relating to transnational crimes that mandate states adjust their domestic legal system accordingly. In Europe, liability venues for such cases have slowly but steadily developed in domestic legal systems since the Council of Europe in 1988 urged member states to change their domestic criminal codes to include corporate criminal liability. Even civil courts could accommodate tort claims related to the different CSR issue areas under the so-called Brussels I Regulation. However, it’s always about regulating the most egregious violations with a set of obligatory minimum standard (Kaeb, 2015, p. 118). Somehow, all eyes are on demonstrate how soft law and hard law can be structured to ensure positive compliance results on the part of corporations in a way that is consistent with human rights. Kaeb talks about a hybrid model that increasingly blurs the boundary between selfregulation and accountability, after considering how CSR has increasingly been framed as a human rights issue (Kaeb, 2015, p. 115).

This difference pushes the scholars to ask wether there is a kind of convergence or path or an impossible communication between both CSR and BHR fields. There is a tendency today to interpret the later as a part of broader of the former one approaches. But, as Wettsein states, BHR has emerged and evolved largely separate and in parallel to the broader CSR debate (Wettstein, 2020, p. 23). No only that. In trying to distinguish the specific nature of BHR, it seems to be more than a seamless and ‘harmonic’ complement to CSR, a critical response to it. His argument, complementary, observes that rather than as an extension of the broader CSR discussion BHR should be understood as a critique of it, that is, as a movement whose emergence and success may not least be informed by what some perceive as the failure of CSR (Wettstein, 2020, p. 35).

For Wettstein, due to this opposition and the strongness of CSR, it has potential to be turned against BHR, favouring private responsibility schemes over public accountability structures, so CSR can be used to distract from, block and prevent the BHR in situations in which binding measures would be called for. Deva shares the idea of an impossible even maybe destructive dialogue, even when they can have simmilars starting point of corporations having responsibilities beyond their shareholders. But Deva goes futher and argues about an emergence of a new and third era, after the origins with business or human rights and the current business and human rights: she defines the new one as that of the business of human rights, due to corporations and industry associations co-opt the language of human rights to serve their business interests (Deva, 2020, p. 5). For her, it is about a frontage, where businesses create the public impression of being leaders in respecting human rights, but without bringing any fundamental change to their current business models, what finally can derive to the BHR end up becoming the ‘new CSR’.

Nevertheless, both propose a sideways movement in order to rescue BHR from corporate capture. For instance, Wettsein observes that nonjudicial avenues, such as the conceptualization of operational-level grievance mechanisms, have remained relatively underdeveloped and often inadequate. He also advocates for historic CSR providing a conceptual frame for a more holistic theorization of remedies owed in the context of past (historic) human rights violations. Actually, in a clear evolution of his ideas, with Schrempf-Stirling and Van Buren, offers a perspective that can set BHR and CSR scholarship on a converging path, focusing on the social control of business concept, to unifying rationale underneath the surfacelevel differences between the two fields (Schrempf-Stirling et al., 2022, p. 1284). They wonder why and how society makes business act responsibly and channels business behaviors toward socially desirable ends. It is what they call a research agenda for BHR informed CSR, breaking down with instrumental and positivist practices in corporations, instead of basing its strategies on normative: ethics and moral principles, focus on avoiding harm, protecting rightsholders, and holding business accountable for human rights violations. This proposition implies a rightsholder-centered business strategies, re-introduction of compliance orientation, accountability for harm, and remedy for corporate human rights violations, always considering both state and corporate responsibilities in accounting for past human rights violations.

Behind this effortful search of clarity in the relationship of both fields, lies a serious inquiry: as Charlotte Walker-Said starts her study, is the corporation a crucible or an obstacle for the global human rights order? A benefactor or nemesis? (Walker-Said, 2015, p. 1). In her case, she claims the rasing power of corporations, and in parallel, the CSR as the new focus of global idealism and an unassailable framework for organizing ethical priorities, as long as CSR continues to snowball in the form of movements for sustainability, fair trade, renewable energy, transparency, poverty alleviation, triple bottom line (TRL), socially responsible investing (SRI) and private sector development (PSD). In this sense, she observes that trough iniciatives like UN Global Compact, it positions itself as, improving the human condition, protecting economic expansion and superseding human rights in its stated aims and correcting its shortcomings (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. 10). Considering what has been stated before, she sosteins a critical point of view, that argument that a regulatory model of CSR have been marginalized from many institutional discussions, when even the UN declared it is unambiguously against establishing a form of CSR that would create a transnational judicial system of redress for human rights violations committed by corporations (Walker-Said, 2015, p. 5). But even when what leads the logic is the shareholders interests (“shareholder primacy”), CSR is considered as a series of economic and political strategies that are currently shifting the focus of international human rights activism and signaling the rise of new forms of global governance, and in some cases, not only making the realization of human rights possible through corporate engagement, but also substantive corporate reform and making accountability achievable in cases where corporations have not answered the call to encourage livelihood creation, and instead have capitalized on a globalized economic system that has few formal prohibitions against exploitation (Walker-Said, 2015, p. 8).

In a deeper critic, Rosenblum quotes Gerard Hanlon to say that CSR represents a further embedding of capitalist social relations and a deeper opening up of social life to the dictates of the marketplace (Rosenblum, 2015, p. 44). But as we have been seen in the writing of many scholars, the movement is somehow contradictory and if CSR is not transforming corporations, in fits and starts it is yielding surprising results and even in the face of willing hypocrisy, it can restrain a corporation (Rosenblum, 2015, p. 48). As Bijlmakers also stated, if the UNGPs, by placing CSR at the centre of a polycentric system of global governance, succeed in bringing compliance and achieving changes in the behaviour of the corporate world in relation to human rights, the corporate responsibility to respect human rights is bound to have more and more legal status – and renewed (both legal and non-legal) effects (Bijlmakers, 2018, p. 8).

For Kirsch, CSR discourse extends the power of corporations to achieve their goals through the use of virtuous language, using strategically deployable shifters like sustainability and corporate social responsibility, against greater regulation or other interventions and critical discourses labeled as “low-minded sentimentality”. In a methodological call, regarding what has been rescued below, he comments that the only way to demystify such virtuous language is to examine its history, and in particular the concrete struggles through which it emerges in contrast to “just so” stories of corporate enlightenment or the economic rationalization of the business case for social responsibility, the audiences to which it is directed, what it claims to accomplish, and the consequences of its deployment in both industry and the academy (Kirsch, 2015, p. 107).

# Second movement

## Recent History as a Turning Point: deeping the juditial path in Latin America

This development places us on a very specific trajectory related to CSR, even more to BHR, but somehow growned from a different background. In first place, we talk about some collective actions taken against companies before BHR field began to show up. Somehow, sowing its path and feeding on him. In the second place, these movements are converging with and eventually derive from a more broad latinoamerican human rights emergence, development and institutionalization. This stair connects the third point: the cases we will address as part of wider development, walk a very complex and concrete path we commented before: the juditial path, seeking to address recent and relatively distant past corporate violence. What I find very interest in these cases is that, trough different mechanisms, labor, civil and criminal courts, victims achieve for justice, against individual or the corporation itself.

So, we connect now again with Miller’s claims and current propositions for specific corporate accountability, traying to outline a brief background for these cases (Miller, 2008). Whereas this norm is challenged today by decisions of geopolitical –economic and political- decisions, a decade ago, Sikkink described Latinamerica as a region that has proven to be the most innovative in this field, concentrating the largest number of judicial proceedings for crimes against humanity worldwide. This has enabled a shift in the legitimacy of the norm of individual criminal responsibility for high-ranking officials. Countries such as Argentina were pioneers, initiating judicial processes early on (such as the 1985 Trial of the Juntas) or driving particular proceedings beyond and even against the State. Far from being mutually exclusive, justice mechanisms—such as trials and Truth Commissions—have been combined with positive results (Sikkink, 2016, p. 159).

The impact of these processes has refuted the predictions of skeptics: twenty years after the first trials, no Latin American democracy has been weakened by having initiated them. On the contrary, transitional countries that implemented judicial proceedings tend to be less repressive and have achieved improvements in the protection of human rights, subordinating military powers to civilian control. However, and beyond the current situation demands an urgent analizis update of these results, this “justice cascade” process was early tempered and as so some cases were mentioned and some of them came before courts and achieved convictions, many others produce deep justice gaps when facing potential charges for civil or criminal liability. We have seen a screenshot of this situation with step forward and back with the breaking news in Argentina, for instace.

In these cases, the connection between the focus on the individual criminal responsibility of state agents—the core achievement of transitional justice in the region—and the attention to civil responsibilities, specifically corporate ones, is articulated through the expansion of the concept of accountability. Consequently, Latin American countries have also stood out for broadening their efforts to prosecute private actors who have condoned, participated in, or sponsored grave crimes within transitional contexts (Global Iniciative For Justice, Truth and Reconciliation, 2021, p. 59). The verification that mass repression was planned and executed with the consent, complicity, or participation of a diverse group of social actors has been one of the central findings of justice and truth-seeking processes. Although private sector accountability has remained limited, it has been significant in pioneering cases such as those of Colombia and Argentina (Payne et al., 2020). Official and unofficial mechanisms, including truth commissions and other complementary tools; domestic trials and proceedings outside national jurisdictions in search of both criminal and civil liability; administrative reparation measures; and voluntary actions to support peace processes.

“Payne, L. A., et al. (2016). Responsabilidad corporativa y justicia transicional. Oxford. La base de datos Corporate Accountability and Transitional Justice (CATJ) realiza un seguimiento de los mecanismos de rendición de cuentas dirigidos a los actores económicos en contextos de justicia transicional. Está segmentada en cuatro conjuntos discretos de datos, por mecanismos. El primer conjunto incluye los datos históricos de los juicios por las atrocidades contra los derechos humanos cometidas por actores económicos en la Alemania nazi y en Japón durante la Segunda Guerra Mundial. Nuestra investigación revela 349 empresas y sus empleados quese enfrentaron a cargos por crímenes contra la humanidad (excluyendo los crímenes de guerra) en 35 casos en tres oleadas de procesos de rendición de cuentas. El segundo conjunto de datos sobre mecanismos de rendición de cuentas son las comisiones de la verdad oficiales. Hemos rastreado la rendición de cuentas por la complicidad de las empresas en 23 comisiones de la verdad de 20 países de todo el mundo, la mitad de las 39 comisiones de la verdad con informes finales accesibles. Estos informes identificaron a 329 actores económicos por su nombre por los presuntos abusos cometidos en conflictos armados o regímenes autoritarios. El tercer conjunto de datos incluye la responsabilidad judicial por la complicidad de las empresas en las violaciones ocurridas durante los regímenes autoritarios y los conflictos armados desde la década de 1960 hasta la actualidad. En conjunto, encontramos 149 actores económicos implicados en 104 casos en 18 países de todo el mundo. El conjunto de datos también incluye un cuarto mecanismo de rendición de cuentas utilizado en Colombia. El proceso de Justicia y Paz es un mecanismo de justicia transicional diseñado a principios de la década de 2000 para juzgar a los líderes paramilitares. En sus confesiones, mencionaron el papel que tuvieron los actores económicos en la violencia. Este conjunto de datos incluye 439 actores económicos presuntamente implicados en el conflicto, con violaciones que incluyen la creación y financiación de grupos paramilitares, el desplazamiento forzado, el asesinato y la tortura de líderes sindicales y comunitarios.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 30)

“Este estudio intenta explicar cómo Argentina ha logrado ese rol protagónico. Para ello, aplica el modelo de la “Palanca de Arquímedes” (PA) desarrollado por Payne, Pereira y Bernal Bermúdez, que considera la interacción de cuatro factores para explicar los resultados de la rendición de cuentas de actores económicos. Como afirmaba Arquímedes, los actores débiles, en este caso los grupos de la sociedad civil del Sur Global, recurren a las herramientas adecuadas para levantar el peso que implica lograr la rendición de cuentas de actores económicos. En el ámbito de la búsqueda de la responsabilidad empresarial estas herramientas están en manos de los innovadores institucionales que traducen las demandas del movimiento de derechos humanos en procesos institucionales de rendición de cuentas. Su capacidad para hacerlo depende de la colocación del punto de apoyo, o de un contexto político favorable, y de la reducción del poder de quienes sostienen el statu quo de impunidad respecto de la complicidad empresarial, los actores de veto en la comunidad empresarial3” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 30)

What I aim to adress in this section is an analysis of three emblematic and recent cases of corporate accountability through justice in Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, as I presented before courts, after decades of frustration for victims and an endeavor truth, and mejory process. They represent different cases of corporate violence, against different actors and within different frameworks, but success can only be explained on the centrality of the endeavor and endurance of these “memory entrepenaurs”. The triales were sustainable because of the transformation of the communicative memory into plausible testimonies before prosecutors and courts. But three more elements were decisive: a) the commitment of trustable lawyers and foundations for justice; b) the consistence of very well documented historical investigation; c) the existence of a political commitment sustained in a consolidated memory, truth and justicy public policy.

Regarding differences, it’s interesting noting that they concern three different types of extreme corporate violence: repression in industrial sector, like Ford in Argentina, slavery like conditions in a cattle ranch in the Brazilian Amazon, with Volkswagen, and paralimitary financing, killings of unionist and peasant displacement in Colombia, with Chiquita. Two companies are from Unitated States and one European. Two cases took place within dictatorships regimes in the seventies and eighties, ending the import sustitions industrialization period, in the previous century, and one within complex armed conflict context during the developing of neoliberalist model and democratic regime, even reaching the current century. Brazilian case was settled before federal labour courts, while Argentine’s was held before criminal federal law and trial agains Chiquita was sustained both before American civil court and before Colombian criminal courts.

These similarities and differences make the comparative analysis so valious, regarding not only this section, but what comes in the second and third movement.

## From classical trials to Ford: breaking paradigm

Ford Motor Company, multinacional estadounidense dedicada a la fabricación de automóviles, abrió su primera sucursal en Argentina en 1913, inicialmente en La Boca, un barrio industrial del sur de la ciudad de Buenos Aires. Durante el gobierno del presidente Arturo Frondizi (1958-1962), y en el marco de la segunda etapa del proceso de industrialización por sustitución de importaciones en Argentina, Ford decidió ampliar su presencia en el país2. En 1959, con motivo de la visita de Henry Ford II a Argentina, la empresa presentó la Pick-Up F100 y anunció la creación de Ford Argentina S.C.A., junto con un amplio plan de inversiones. En 1961 se inauguró la nueva planta de fabricación de automóviles de Ford Motor Argentina en General Pacheco.

Los trabajadores de Ford Motor Argentina estaban representados por el Sindicato de Mecánicos y Afines del Transporte Automotor (SMATA). La empresa tenía prestigio: los empleados deseaban ser contratados por Ford porque consideraban que sus salarios eran relativamente altos; urante la década de 1960 los trabajadores ejercieron presión tanto sobre la empresa como sobre sus representantes sindicales con demandas laborales persistentes, cuestionando, entre otras, las condiciones de trabajo difíciles e insalubres que generaban problemas de salud a los trabajadores(Ianni, 2011)

Además, creció en la fábrica la oposición a los cambios en la organización de la producción que exigían una mayor intensidad de trabajo y provocaban problemas de salud5. Sin embargo, este proceso lejos de marcar coincidencias dentro del sindicato, se manifestó en diversos conflictos intrasindicales.(Lascano Warnes, 2012)

The installation of the dictatorship on March 24, 1976, qualitatively altered the balance of power in the country, even then the state terrorism had already realeased its clandestine and reprresive forces. At the Ford plant in General Pacheco (Province of Buenos Aires), the army intervened immediately.

Un informe exhaustivo que investigó el caso de Ford junto con otras veinticuatro empresas del país registró un total de 37 víctimas de violaciones a los derechos humanos durante la dictadura de 1976-1983 en Argentina relacionadas con Ford Motor Argentina

In the following weeks, security forces abducted 24 workers from the factory or their homes.

la mayoría de los cuales eran miembros de la comisión de delegados sindicales (“Comisión interna”), mientras que casi todos ellos eran activistas laborales sin afiliación política activa

Los militares actuaban a pedido de la gerencia, que tenía su voz cantante en un tal Galarraga, gerente de Relaciones Institucionales..Pero aparte de las conexiones entre las Fuerzas Armadas y la empresa y el suministro general de infraestructura, combustible, alimentos y apoyo, hubo muchas formas concretasLa cúpula de la empresa estaba al tanto de estas acciones e incluso las planificó meticulosamente, teniendo preparados a sus sustitutos para que la fábrica nunca dejara de funcionar. Entre los detenidos en las instalaciones de la empresa se encontraba Juan Carlos Conti, delegado del SMATA que trabajaba para Ford desde 1965 y que fue secuestrado el 14 de abril de 1976. Tras su secuestro, como ocurrió con la mayoría de los trabajadores secuestrados, la empresa lo acusó de “abandono el trabajo”

En quinto lugar, el personal de Ford participó en los interrogatorios y torturas de los delegados secuestrados para extraer información sobre las actividades sindicales en la fábrica. la voz del jefe de seguridad de la fábrica, Héctor Francisco Sibilla. Sibilla era miembro de las Fuerzas Armadas, y el 26 de julio de 1978, tras el secuestro de los trabajadores, fue ascendido al grado de teniente coronel. Tras su paso por la empresa, fue contratado para trabajar en la seguridad de la embajada de Estados Unidos, cargo que ocupó hasta 2004

Muchos de ellos permanecieron desaparecidos entre 30 y 60 días. Algunos fueron secuestrados en sus casas y llevados a dos comisarías, Tigre y Maschwitz, que funcionaban como centros clandestinos de detención. Otros fueron apresados directamente en la fábrica, donde fueron retenidos durante horas, torturados, y luego llevados a las comisarías mencionadas, permaneciendo allí durante semanas en condiciones extremadamente precarias. Después de este tiempo inicial, fueron trasladados a diversas penitenciarías de todo el país

They were clandestinely taken to various detention centers, even inside the corporate private territory, specifically in the recreational and barbecue spaces. Surpraisingily, all of them were eventually “legalized” in different prisons throughout the country before their eventual release, but all were dismissed by the company while in detention.

During the dictatorship, filing a complaint was impossible without extreme risk. Families –especially their wives- sought their missing relatives through official channels that systematically denied any knowledge. Although documentation existed—intelligence files, company records, detention center logs—it was controlled by the perpetrators. Worker testimonies circulated clandestinely among families and nascent human rights organizations. Karen Robert has recently reconstructed the journey of these families from those initial moments to the 2018 trial (Robert, 2025).

No solo la empresa obtuvo promisorios resultados económicos, En el ambiente represivo descrito anteriormente, con severas restricciones o la eliminación de la actividad sindical en el taller y fuera de él, los trabajadores tuvieron que trabajar más intensamente y durante más tiempo cada jornada mientras sus salarios disminuían y sus condiciones de trabajo empeoraban considerablemente.

Rescatar las declaraciones de Courard en mis notas y en los fundamentos:

Juan María Courard, hizo en una entrevista con el New York Times en febrero de 1976. En ese momento, poco antes del golpe militar, sostuvo que “los terroristas no son sólo los guerrilleros en las montañas o en las calles. También están en la cadena de montaje, amenazando a los trabajadores y diciéndoles cómo tienen que producir cada díaUn ejemplo es la declaración pública que hizo en un acto celebrado el 13 de mayo de 1980 para anunciar la construcción de una nueva planta de fabricación de camiones en las instalaciones de Ford Motor Argentina en presencia de funcionarios de la dictadura.

En nuestro caso había que tomar una decisión empresaria, y con nuestros actos y procedimientos, demostrábamos cuál era esa decisión. Ford Motor Argentina estaba de acuerdo en que había que hacer cambios. Y cuando los cambios le tocaron de cerca, se adaptó y se dispuso a trabajar para sacar el mayor provecho de la nueva situación, en pro de la empresa y de la fuente de trabajo de los miles de personas que la componen. En definitiva, en pro del país. Ford Motor Argentina creyó en el Proceso de Reorganización Nacional porque vio en él el vehículo para que el país se reencuentre con su verdadero camino

El discurso también incluía referencias a las personas consideradas una influencia positiva porque construyen, y a las consideradas una influencia negativa porque “no tienen patria, ni Dios”, y “trabajan para dividir”, “...que han sido tan difíciles de erradicar”

Despite the economic loss and isolation suffered due to blacklisting, a core group of survivors and relatives reactivated after the return to democracy in 1983. During this period of transitional justice, the mechanisms that emerged resulted from the interaction between the human rights movement, the government, and the political opposition. In all three cases, they had to navigate improvisation in unfamiliar territory. It was a process with a life of its own, whose development and outcomes escaped the calculations and desires of all involved (Sikkink, 2016, p. 87 La autora cita un trabajo de Oscar Landi y Inés González Boinbal, “Los derechos en la cultura política”).

Upon assuming the presidency in 1983, Ricardo Alfonsín took several key measures for justice. The most significant were the repeal of the Self-Amnesty Law, the creation of the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons (CONADEP), and the Trial of the Military Juntas. This transition allowed families to denounce crimes publicly. CONADEP was a pioneer; its Nunca Más report included a chapter on union activists, naming 11 companies and reporting that firms had provided repressive forces with lists of militants and union leaders. Ford victims testified before this Commission, and the Nunca Más report highlighted the Pacheco plant as one of the “emblematic cases” of attacks against union delegates (Conadep, 2006; Robert, 2025).

The 1985 Trial of the Juntas marked the first time a Latin American court convicted state leaders for crimes against humanity. Afterward, the judiciary continued working on numerous cases against lower-ranking officials, driven by victims’ lawyers through private prosecution clauses in the country’s criminal code. This expansion, which exceeded Alfonsín’s original plan to only prosecute the nine leaders, resulted in lawsuits against nearly three hundred military personnel, sparking unrest and attempted coups (Sikkink, 2016). Under military pressure and believing concessions were necessary to preserve democracy, the Alfonsín government enacted the Ley de Obediencia Debida (Full Stop and Due Obedience Laws)—an amnesty that essentially blocked further trials. This phase of impunity was consolidated when President Carlos Menem pardoned the sentenced military officers.

In this context, survivors filed wrongful dismissal lawsuits against Ford, seeking the severance pay they had been denied. However, the courts rejected these claims by citing the statute of limitations and refusing to nullify the laws imposed by the dictatorship.

“Argentina instrumentó la primera comisión de la verdad nacional en el mundo dedicada a establecer la verdad respecto de los sucesos atroces que acontecieron en el pasado reciente. También celebró el primer juicio contra los máximos responsables de la implementación de un plan sistemático de violaciones a los derechos humanos llevado a cabo por autoridades locales nacionales. El país también es reconocido por haber adoptado el programa de reparación de víctimas de gran amplitud. La estructura militar autoritaria se desmanteló a través de reformas institucionales e investigaciones. Argentina también es conocida por el conjunto de juicios de derechos humanos más extensivo del mundo3” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 35)

Corte Suprema modificó su sentencia aplicando interrupciones de la prescripción. Aunque las demandas se referían a reclamos laborales, se sustentaban en la convicción de que Ford era responsable de secuestros y torturas. El alegato final del juez Juan Carlos Morando en el juicio laboral de Conti lo dejó claro: El Dr. Capón Filas, en su voto, ha demostrado que la sociedad demandada actuó, en la emergencia, con una ejemplar mala fe. Incluso en el curso del proceso, pretendió asumir una inadmisible posición de tercero desinteresado, en relación con las circunstancias en que fueron detenidos el actor y los restantes de legados, episodio en el que estas actuaciones suscitan la certeza moral de que sus funcionarios actuaron como instigadores (Basualdo, Ojea Quintana y Varsky, “Los casos de Ford y Mercedes-Benz Argentina”, p. 190.

“orn in 1960 in West Germany, Kaleck embarked upon his career as human rights lawyer in 1998, working for the Coalition against Impunity, an association of NGOs concerned with holding accountable Argentinean military officials involved in the murder of German citizens during the so-called “Dirty War”.20 Among various cases brought to German courts, Kaleck formulated in 1999 a criminal complaint against managers of Mercedes Benz accused of aiding the enforced disappearance of trade unionists in the 1970s (see infra).” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 6)

“The first criminal complaint ever brought to court against economic actors involved in political violence in the Southern Cone was lodged in 1999, in Germany, by Kaleck and CELS against representatives of Mercedes Benz.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 9)

“In November 2003, the Nuremberg Prosecutor’s Office closed the investigations” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 9) “In this context, Kaleck and CELS advised victims to seek redress in American courts, basing their case on Alien Tort Statute.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 10) “In 2014 the US Supreme Court ruled that Daimler did not have sufficient ties with California for courts to hear the case.” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 10)

The search for justice then shifted to the international arena. With judicial paths closed in Argentina, survivors—aided by attorney Tomás Ojea Quintana—attempted to file a lawsuit in U.S. courts in 2004 under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS). This strategy was unsuccessful in the short-term due to unfavorable legal precedents. Mientras tanto, en 2004, un estudio de abogados estadounidense representado por Paul Hoffman acordó demandar a Ford Motor Company

Esta presentación despertó expectativas, pero éstas se vieron frustradas cuando los abogados estadounidenses decidieron retirarse poco antes de que la empresa fuera notificada de la demanda. Su decisión había sido motivada por una sentencia del Tribunal Supremo de Estados Unidos que limitaba seriamente los futuros casos del ATCA. Se cayó

Pedro Troiani se convirtió en demandante en una causa penal presentada ante los tribunales en noviembre de 200225. Desde el principio, el objetivo principal de la causa presentada por Troiani, acompañado por el resto de los delegados sindicales, tenía como objetivo principal subrayar el papel que desempeñaron los directivos de Ford en los crímenes cometidos. La causa, caratulada “Müller, Pedro y otros sobre detención ilegal” (conocida como la causa “Ford”, N° 2.855), pretendía determinar cuál había sido la responsabilidad exacta de militares y civiles

By 2003, Congress, supported by President Néstor Kirchner, passed a law annulling the amnesty laws. Finally, in June 2005, based on the supremacy of international human rights law, the Supreme Court declared them unconstitutional by a seven-to-one majority. This allowed for the reopening of hundreds of closed cases and the issuance of numerous sentences afterwards. Several factors converged for this reopening: the 2001–2002 economic crisis had delegitimized the neoliberal policies associated with the impunity of the 1990s; the human rights movement maintained its pressure; and prosecutors developed sophisticated jurisprudence by applying international law concepts (crimes against humanity, imprescriptibility, universal jurisdiction) to domestic cases. Internationally, a global human rights culture was developing, marked by the establishment of the International Criminal Court and the 1998 Spanish prosecution of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet.

When political opportunity arose, these organizations were positioned to press aggressively for accountability. Kirchner made his alliance with human rights movements explicit, breaking with the “politics of forgetting.” This confluence created a window for prosecuting not only direct state actors but also corporate collaborators. The Ford case became possible within this broader framework. However, opening this window required decades of preparation—organizational capacity, legal development, and political pressure—proving that opportunities do not emerge spontaneously but through sustained work. In this context, Ford’s victims, their spouses, and children, transformed into “memory entrepreneurs”, organized, testified repeatedly, preserved documents, and maintained public denunciations when “official” Argentina preferred silence. The “Truth Trials” (Juicios por la Verdad) were a privileged setting for this (Schapiro, 2002).

By then, various academic and advocacy publications had highlighted the responsibility, complicity, or benefits obtained by business owners during the dictatorship and their role in installing “neoliberal shock.” The corporate civilian actor lost its veil. To the early texts emphasizing the repression of the labor movement (such as those by CADHU) were added criminal complaints by the Central de Trabajadores Argentinos (CTA) in international jurisdictions in 1998, and complaints for fraud and illegal economy, such as those promoted by Alejandro Olmos. Thus, the term “military dictatorship” was replaced by “civic-military dictatorship” to accurately reflect the bloc of interests (military, civilian, economic, and ecclesiastical) involved in the repression Vicente"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["1976"\]\]}}},{"id":27198,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/6VQ8Y8FP"\],"itemData":{"id":27198,"type":"book","ISBN":"950-99525-0-8","publisher":"Editorial de los Argentinos","title":"Todo lo que usted quiso saber sobre la deuda externa y siempre se lo ocultaron","author":\[{"family":"Olmos","given":"Alejandro"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["1990"\]\]}}},{"id":1026,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/D65U9GW9"\],"itemData":{"id":1026,"type":"book","license":"CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication","number-of-volumes":"2","publisher":"InfoJus","publisher-place":"Buenos Aires","title":"Responsabilidad empresarial en delitos de lesa humanidad. Represión a trabajadores durante el terrorismo de Estado","author":\[{"literal":"Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación"},{"family":"Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS)","given":""},{"literal":"Programa Verdad y Justicia"},{"literal":"Área de Economía y Tecnología de Flacso"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2015"\]\]}}},{"id":1050,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/6QKYKY2Z"\],"itemData":{"id":1050,"type":"book","publisher":"Siglo XXI Editores","publisher-place":"Buenos Aires","title":"Cuentas Pendientes. Los cómplices económicos de la dictadura","editor":\[{"family":"Verbitsky","given":"Horacio"},{"family":"Bohoslavsky","given":"Juan Pablo"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2013"\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} (Bohoslavsky, 2022; González Tizón, 2022; Muleiro, 1976; Olmos, 1990; Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación et al., 2015; Verbitsky & Bohoslavsky, 2013). A poster printed and distributed in 2006 March 24th, during one of the biggest manifestations up to then conmemoring the fracture of democracy in 1976, the 30th anniversary, said: Foreing Debt is Dictatorship, linking the current unveiling the effects of the economic model imposed by a civic-military dictatorship.

causa “Ford” fue tramitada en tres departamentos diferentes de la justicia federal y tardó más de once años en ser elevada a juicio. En 2014, la causa fue asignada al Tribunal Oral Federal N° 1 de San Martín (en la provincia de Buenos Aires), y el juicio finalmente comenzó el 19 de diciembre de 201726

Particularly significant were the report produced by the human rights office of the National Securities Commission (CNV) on how it was used to gather intelligence and persecute business owners, while financial crimes were committed (Perosino et al., 2013); and the 2015 report Corporate Responsibility in Crimes Against Humanity, produced with state leadership. This report documented corporate complicity across 25 companies nationwide, providing high-quality legal evidence of state-corporate collaboration. This research identified nearly 900 victims and named companies such as Ford, Fiat, Acindar, and Ledesma (Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación et al., 2015).

Through the connection of Ford victims with labor and human rights networks, researchers, and legal teams, critical evidence was incorporated into judicial files, leading to an oral trial against the surviving executives. Survivors performed symbolic actions, such as placing a sign with the Ford logo and barbed wire next to the Pacheco plant.

C “Con más de veinte causas judiciales contra actores económicos iniciadas en los últimos quince años, se ha convertido en líder mundial en materia de la rendición de cuentas de la complicidad empresarial en contextos de justicia transicional (JT)” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 29)

Cuando finalmente se inició el juicio oral del proceso penal en Buenos Aires, en diciembre de 2017, había tres querellantes diferentes junto con la fiscalía

El presidente de la empresa, Juan María Courard, falleció antes de que comenzara el juicio, mientras que Guillermo Galarraga, gerente del departamento de Relaciones Laborales, falleció mientras se preparaba la causa. Los dos altos ejecutivos de Ford Motor Argentina que fueron juzgados, por lo tanto, fueron Pedro Müller, gerente de manufactura, que sustituyó al presidente en ausencia de Courard, y Héctor Francisco Jesús Sibilla, que era el Jefe de Seguridad y Protección en ese momento

El juicio oral incluyó los testimonios de las víctimas sobrevivientes, sus cónyuges, algunos de sus hijos e hijas y otros familiares, así como de los peritos, e

Los abogados de la defensa no discutieron los hechos relativos a las violaciones a los derechos humanos, pero argumentaron que las Fuerzas Armadas habían sido las únicas responsables de las mismas.

The judicial process lasted a year and culminated in the Federal Criminal Court of San Martín with the unanimous conviction of two former Ford Argentina executives, Pedro Müller (plant manager) and Héctor Sibilla (head of security), along with military commander Santiago Omar Riveros. The judges ruled that the executives acted as “necessary participants” (partícipes necesarios) in crimes against humanity. The ruling established that corporate actors who provided information and facilitated access for security forces held criminal responsibility. The judicial grounds (fundamentos), released subsequently, incorporated a significant portion of the research conducted in previous years, which had been debated during the hearings, including the closing arguments. This conviction was considered a historic milestone—the first criminal trial against representatives of a multinational corporation in a national court of the Global South (Jasinski, 2018; Payne et al., 2020; Robert, 2025).

The corporate response was one of silence and denial. On one hand, the company never publicly acknowledged its collaboration with the dictatorship’s repression. It vigorously defended the executives, claiming they “lacked knowledge” or were “following orders,” and even suggested that the workers were legitimately suspected of being subversives. Throughout the process, the company provided records only when legally compelled, alleging that many documents were “lost.” Furthermore, the defense attorneys for the accused had observable links to Ford, despite the company’s claims that it was not involved as a party to the events (Jasinski, 2018a, 2018b).

During a judicial inspection (inspección ocular) of the factory, they prohibited any contact between the victims and the on-shift workers, instead of seizing the opportunity to promote the value of human rights (Jasinski, 2018). Even after the criminal convictions, the company has neither apologized nor recognized its systematic collaboration. While the news spread globally in multiple languages, the local media outlets where the company advertised opted for silence (Jasinski, 2018). When the sentence was issued, more than four decades had passed. The young workers were now 70 or 80 years old, carrying the weight of both the traum

a and the long years of being forgotten. Not all of them, because 13 of the original plaintiffs passed away without seeing the verdict. In 2022, the Federal Chamber of Criminal Cassation confirmed the conviction. Ford Motor Company faced no institutional consequences; the executives were prosecuted individually.

Después de un año de audiencias, 42 años después de los hechos y dieciséis años después de que se iniciara el proceso judicial, el 11 de diciembre de 2018 se anunció el veredicto eLos jueces consideraron a Sibilla y Müller “partícipes necesarios” de las detenciones ilegales y las torturas,

En primer lugar, explicaron que estos actos calificaban como crímenes de lesa humanidad. Invocaron sentencias de la Corte Suprema de Justicia de Argentina y también se refirieron a los veredictos de varios tribunales internacionales para afirmar claramente que los civiles podían, efectivamente, ser autores de tales crímenesLos jueces consideraron que las autoridades y altos funcionarios de Ford habían hecho “un aporte específico de información de los trabajadores a ser secuestrados”29. Por un lado, habían entregado a las fuerzas militares los legajos del personal y, por otro lado, se probó que la información que los altos funcionarios de Ford habían remitido para que se realizaran los secuestros se concretó en listas de personas a ser secuestradas. En segundo lugar, los jueces también consideraron que se había probado con el mismo grado de certeza la ayuda logística de los funcionarios de la empresa a las Fuerzas Armadas para llevar a cabo los secuestros. Dicha ayuda incluía recursos materiales como vehículos, alimentos y gasolina, entre otros.

En tercer lugar, en cuanto a los motivos de estas acciones criminales, los jueces dictaminaron que la eliminación de las comisiones internas de las organizaciones sindicales dentro de las fábricas, “símbolo de la fuerza obrera y de la resistencia a las demandas de eficiencia, fue un objetivo común entre empresarios y los militares que de facto ocuparon el gobierno” Los jueces añadieron que existía “una relación estratégica entre los militares y un sector de la cúpula empresarial” porque ambos grupos tenían intereses en común, a saber, asegurar una “normalización” de las relaciones laborales y la transformación profunda de la estructura económica y social que pretendían promover31. (Juzgado Federal Penal N° 1 de San Martín, integrado por los doctores Osvaldo Alberto Facciano, Mario Jorge Gambacorta y Eugenio J. Martínez Ferrero, y la secretaria de Cámara Déborah E. Damonte, Fundamentos del veredicto de los juicios N° 2.855 y 2.358, 15 de marzo, 2019, p. 201)

Fue a través de la fábrica que los funcionarios de la empresa Ford “efectuaron sus aportes al aparato represivo del estado, proveyendo información, medios, e instalaciones a los fines de la comisión de crímenes de lesa humanidad”3

“Una defensa legal estándar llevada adelante por prestigiosos abogados129 resultó insuficiente frente a unos niveles de movilización de la sociedad civil y de innovación institucional sin precedentes. Las víctimas y sus familiares desempeñaron un papel crucial en el proceso del juicio, especialmente el testimonio de doce de las trece víctimas vivas” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 56)

“Un amplio abanico de actores acompañó el reclamo de justicia de las víctimas, dando visibilidad al juicio, monitoreando sus audiencias y facilitando la recolección de pruebas cruciales. Entre ellos, el poderoso Sindicato Unificado de Trabajadores de la Educación de la Provincia de Buenos Aires (SUTEBA) y la Central de Trabajadores de la Argentina (CTA), que realizaron una serie de actividades públicas de apoyo130. Asimismo, figuras emblemáticas del movimiento nacional de derechos humanos abrazaron la causa131. Esta alianza entre sectores mantuvo una movilización activa durante todo el proceso” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 56)

“Los innovadores legales emprendieron una estrategia múltiple que implicó la presentación de casos en muchos tribunales utilizando una variedad de estrategias legales, desde acciones de responsabilidad civil en los Estados Unidos hasta acciones penales y civiles en Argentina.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 56)

“Entre los innovadores también se encuentran la Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación y la Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Provincia de Buenos Aires, que participaron como querellantes. Otro innovador clave fue el fiscal asignado al caso, Marcelo García Berro, considerado uno de los fiscales más experimentados en crímenes de lesa humanidad del país133. Los académicos también se sumaron como innovadores institucionales en este proceso, contribuyendo a la recopilación de pruebas que fortalecieron el caso.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 57)

“Un elemento del modelo de la PA casi imposible de replicar respecto del caso argentino es la movilización de la sociedad civil. Los años de movilización y las conexiones con aliados en las comunidades laboral, jurídica y de derechos humanos en Argentina rara vez se reproducen en otros lugares. Sin embargo, vemos que la movilización en favor de la responsabilidad empresarial está surgiendo en otros contextos” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 59)

Besides the 2018 criminal sentence, three years later, a reparation agreement was reached before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). The origin can be found in the rejection of the victims’ civil claims by the Argentine judiciary in the 1980s allowing the case reach the IACHR. After the Peronism government took office in 2019, in 2020, the Secretariat for Human Rights initiated a dialogue with his legal representatives with the goal of reaching a friendly settlement in the international proceedings. Nevetheless, on March 23, 2021, the IACHR determined that the Argentine State was responsible for denying the victim access to justice regarding the reported crimes. Consequently, it ordered a series of reparation actions that were agreed upon between the Secretariat for Human Rights and Pedro Troiani. But the victim passed away on August 1, 2021.

No matter the lost, inmediate afterwards, the Argentine State and his wife signed a “Recommendation Compliance Agreement” in 2021, which established exhaustive reparations: The creation of an ad hoc tribunal was agreed upon to determine the economic compensation owed to the Troiani family. Also, the State committed to continue pursuing legal avenues so that victims obtain direct compensation from Ford. The application of statutes of limitations regarding the wrongful dismissals of workers imprisoned in 1976 and 1977 was nullified. A commitment to hold a public ceremony featuring high-ranking government officials and an invitation to Ford Argentina executives. The construction of a new monument near the Pacheco plant with three pillars representing Memory, Truth, and Justice. The publication of the IACHR report in national newspapers and its distribution among labor unions and federations (CGT and CTA). The State promised to work with Ford Argentina to secure the declassification of its corporate archives from the dictatorship era. The implementation of human rights training programs for Ford personnel in Argentina and a financial commitment by the company to support research on corporate responsibility in crimes against humanity through CONICET (Robert, 2025; Secretaría de Derechos Humanos de la Nación, 2021).

Beyond Ford, other similar judicial processes took place. While some succeeded, others—like the Las Marías case—did not result in convictions due to the lack of a strong victim community (Jasinski, 2018). Other cases, such as La Veloz del Norte, saw initial convictions later overturned, with the business owner dying unpunished. Currently, the deaths of aging businessmen and a contemporary context adverse to human rights often leave these final attempts at criminal justice in a state of suspension.[11](#footnote11)

“Sólo tres meses después de la condena original de Ford, la Corte Suprema de Justicia anuló una decisión de un tribunal inferior contra la empresa Techint. La Corte argumentó que los plazos de prescripción son válidos para las demandas laborales contra las empresas, incluso cuando están relacionadas con crímenes de lesa humanidad. Entre la impunidad y la justicia de estos casos, existe un rango de casos que todavía se encuentran abiertos y cuyos resultados son difíciles de analizar en términos de justicia.” (“Responsabilida

d civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 29)

“A pesar de la complejidad del análisis de los resultados en términos de justicia, Argentina ha avanzado más que cualquier otro país del mundo en el abordaje de la complicidad empresarial en los procesos judiciales.” (“Responsabilidad civil en delitos de lesa humanidad”, 2022, p. 30)

## Volks in Brazil: From Justice for Repression to Justice for Slave Labor

When the German automaker arrived in São Paulo, Brazil, in 1953 to begin production activities, a dark past already accompanied it. The Nazi regime had created the company in 1937 to manufacture the “people’s car”. Just two years later, in 1939, it was transformed into an armaments factory and began using forced labor. By 1945, at the end of the war, the corporation’s growth was built upon the use of 20,000 workers mobilized under conditions of slavery, representing nearly 80 percent of its workforce.[12](#footnote12) In the immediate postwar period, the company was not held accountable in transitional justice processes. Its authorities denied legal responsibility for forced labor, claiming they were following government orders. No inter-state agreements reached the firm.

Based on this kind of business experiencia and consequent silence, the German automaker reoffended in Brazil, commencing from the outset of the dictatorship in 1964. Significant recent studies illuminate the various entanglements between corporations and dictatorial regimes.[13](#footnote13) Marcelo Almeida de Carvalho Silva analyzes the forms of violence employed by the company in its control of workers and the normalization practices that enabled its indiscriminate exercise, facilitated by the dictatorial context.[14](#footnote14)

“According to Christopher Kopper, until 1979, profits within Volkswagen’s Brazilian subsidiary “remained at a considerably higher level than in the German parent company”” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 183)

But beyond the urban and industrial sphere directly related to its productive activities, the company engaged in other forms of violence.

In the rural Amazonian region of Brazil, specifically in the state of Pará, the company owned a ranch for raising and fattening cattle, which subsequently led to the establishment of a meatpacking plant. During the dictatorial period, forced labor systems, akin to modern slavery, were employed there. This serves as an emblematic case of a broader issue: the persistence of slavery in the Amazon and the strong interconnections between business ventures and public authorities.[15](#footnote15) This case brings into focus indigenous people forcibly mobilized for production, salaried workers, farm inhabitants, sharecroppers, partners, land squatters, and proprietors, contractors, “gatos” (intermediaries or recruiters), gunmen, aviators, foremen, and jagunços (bodyguards)—private groups dedicated to asserting the power of landowners. [16](#footnote16) Threats of expulsion, the introduction of cattle onto plantations, and the slaughter of domestic animals are recurring themes in both academic and fictional literature, with Volkswagen’s case being but one example among others, such as that of Josapar.[17](#footnote17) Despite the Superintendency of Amazonas deeming the project almost entirely completed and successful in 1986, Volkswagen eventually sold the ranch. It emerged that, from the early 1980s, various testimonies revealed a completely inverted reality. The most modern technologies and labor management coexisted with the most archaic forms of exploitation.

By that time, particularly since the intensification of the struggle for redemocratization, denunciations of violence suffered by those imprisoned or persecuted—especially members of organizations involved in the armed struggle—have been recurrent. Less visible was the violence against workers, generally in the peripheries or factories. However, the silence is most striking regarding those living in rural areas, encompassing both rural workers and traditional or Indigenous peoples.[18](#footnote18) Even when denouncements were’nt absent.

By that time, forced labour in the Amazon was widely used for deforestation and cattle production. One of the most well-known companies accused was Volkswagen, which had adquiere a cattle rancha in South Pará in order to diversificate its activities and take advantage of quite importante guvernamental subsidies. Workers who could scape from the places, avoiding private forces persecution, gave the first testimonies to the press. Also to the prosecutors and to the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT), where Priest Ricardo Rezende Figueira began to accumulate memories, such as unionist Natal Viana Ribeiro’s. In adittion, in 1977, the Federation of Rural Workers of Pará lodged a complaint with the Regional Labour Office.

Based in these denouncements, a local police investigation was opened into the VW case. The local police chief acknowledged the crime, but exempted the company. Responsibility fell solely on the “gatos” (the contractors). The investigation concluded inmediatly, in July 1983, and was reopened against the contractors. Nevertheless, there is no record of any worker being freed or any of the alleged tormentors being charged with a crime.[19](#footnote19) However, the State Secretary of Public Security disagreed, arguing company’s responsibilitie. What was proven, by that time, for instance, was that the “gatos” carried out surveillance using armed men to prevent the frequent escape of labourers, especially those insolvents. And when labourers escape and are recaptured, they are tied up and beaten. Rezende Figueira began denouncing the case in the press. The company denied the allegations and invited a delegation of its critics to visit the Rio Cristalino ranch. Thus, a team of pastoral agents and authorities from the prelacy and municipality of São Félix do Araguaia, in Mato Grosso, who took a statement and started to research and publish on this issue.[20](#footnote20)

The denunciations focused on what occurred at the Amazon estate Fazenda Vale do Rio Cristalino were dismissed as exaggerations by the company, which claimed it had “no responsibility” for the practices of its contractors. That corporate stance was maintained for nearly four decades. Even when, in the 1980s, spurred by the Volkswagen Works Council and later by victimas and class-action lawsuits in 1998, the company faced real pressure to address its European past. In the 1990s, seeking to limit legal impacts, its policy shifted completely: it created a compensation fund, opened academic archives, and established commemorative seminars at Auschwitz. This transformed a hostile dispute into a “communicative dispute”, enhancing its legitimacy.[21](#footnote21)

Yet, this did not translate into assuming responsibility for its actions in Brazil. Indeed, the Brazilian transitional justice process is characterized by a notable weakness in accountability. Historically, the country has one of the weakest records regarding the prosecution of state perpetrators during the dictatorship, following a transition categorized as “pactada” (negotiated).[22](#footnote22) The Amnesty Law, enacted during the dictatorship, has remained in force.[23](#footnote23) The hour of corporate responsibility would be long in coming.[24](#footnote24)

Entering the new century, the country’s political context allowed these memories and documentations to gain visibility, especially with the presidency of Lula da Silva, a former worker. The international context also played a role. In December 2010, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACourtHR) ruled that the Brazilian Amnesty Law was invalid, although it remained in force in domestic judicial processes. Concurrently, Brazilian metalworkers’ unions—particularly the powerful São Bernardo union—coordinated with German unions (IG Metall) to pressure Volkswagen globally, creating reputational costs. At the same time, the topic of corporate responsibility and repression during the dictatorship became a specific field of academic research.[25](#footnote25)

With these variables pressing forward, in November 2011, under the new government of Dilma Rousseff (a continuation of the governing party), Law No. 12.528 was passed, creating the National Truth Commission (CNV). Nearly fifty years had passed since the 1964 coup and 26 since the return to democracy. From 2012 onward, the CNV’s operation involved multiple variables. For instance, as a result of discussions at the “Encounter for the Unity of Workers and Peoples of the Land, Waters, and Forests” held in August 2012 in Brasília, the Peasant Truth Commission (CCV) was created to advise the CNV on issues regarding rural workers, identifying victims, perpetrators, and beneficiaries.[26](#footnote26) The Central Única dos Trabalhadores (CUT) did the same. [27](#footnote27)

The CNV’s work plan was divided into three subcommittees, the primary one being the Subcommittee on Research, Generation, and Systematization of Information. Within this main subcommittee were thirteen thematic Working Groups (GT). The group most dedicated to disclosing its results were the ones investigating the losses, victims, and executioners of workers and the labor movement: GT 7, on violations against peasants, rural workers and peasant leagues and GT13, named “Dictatorship and Repression of Workers and the Labor Movement.”[28](#footnote28) A special group was also created for violations against indigenous people.

Based on the work of this commission, the CNV named different economic actors on 123 occasions in its report—far more than any other truth commission report in the world, representing 37% of all such cases identified globally. It did so even though it lacked an explicit mandate to investigate corporate involvement. In the second volume of the final report, the CNV dedicated two specific sections to the subject: the second text, “Human Rights Violations of Workers,” and the eighth, “Civilians who Collaborated with the Dictatorship.”.[29](#footnote29)

The corporate role was considered within the “macro-structures of the dictatorial regime.” Their support and participation were decisive for the success of the coup and the subsequent repression. This role unfolded across four fronts: the use of repressive force and control through persecution, imprisonment, and torture; the labeling of workers as subversives and enemies of the Brazilian nation; the creation and dissemination of blacklists; and political, ideological, and financial support for repressive structures. Companies such as Bradesco, Banco Mercantil de São Paulo, Ultra, Ford, General Motors, Nestlé, General Electric, Mercedes Benz, Siemens, and Light financed the formation of repressive apparatuses like OBAN. Ford and Volkswagen supplied cars, Ultragás provided trucks, and Supergel supplied the Rua Tutóia prison with frozen meals. Fundraising had the active support of the Federation of Industries of the State of São Paulo (FIESP). Politically and ideologically, the alliance between the business elite and the military began before the coup with the 1961 founding of the Institute for Research and Social Studies (IPES).[30](#footnote30)

“The Rubens Paiva São Paulo State Truth Commission was the first to be created, and it completed its work on March 14, 2015.19 This truth commission collected a large number of testimonies from militant workers who stimulated stronger civil mobilization, and was the only one to make specific recommendations in its final report regarding corporate complicity and the need to carry out further accountability processes.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 184)

The report was presented in 2014. Ao receber, em setembro de 2015, do Fórum dos Trabalhadores por Verdade, Justiça e Reparação os documentos provenientes do relatório da CNV, o Ministério Público Federal (MPT) e Ministério Público do Estado de São Paulo, iniciaram investigações contra a empresa. In 2016, Rousseff was removed from the presidency, in a clear shift to the right that deepened afterwards, with the subsequent election of Jair Bolsonaro (2019–2022).

“Yet, the prospects for corporate accountability remain daunting. After so many years, impunity for state and non-state actors persists nearly absolute in Brazil. The Amnesty Law of 1979 (No. 6683) has deprived victims of the dictatorship of their right to take the perpetrators to court to be tried and punished for their crimes. In addition, victims have suffered the effects of an official denialism promoted by the highest levels of the state during the Bolsonaro administration (2019–2022).” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 186)

Based on these reports and due to the volume of existing evidence and international alliances, Volkswagen was chosen as the lead case.

“Barred from prosecuting their torturers in criminal trials, a group of thirteen trade unions filed a civil case—running more than 600 pages—against VW do Brasil before the Federal Public Prosecutor’s Office (MPF).22 This action included the major national unions, such as the Central Workers’ Union (CUT), and regional unions, including the Union of Workers in the Mechanical Metallurgical and Electric Material Industries of Osasco, the Central of Brazilian Trade Unions, and Força Sindical, as well as the Association of the Amnestied Politicians, Retirees, Pensioners and Seniors of the State of São Paulo, among others” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 185)

“Among the individuals who filed the case, we need to highlight Rosa Cardoso, lawyer and president of the Rio de Janeiro State Truth Commission, a member of the CNV” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 185) “As coordinator of the work group “Dictatorship and Repression of Workers and the Union Movement”, Cardoso was a key actor in collecting and classifying worker testimonies, as well as in promoting the need for public hearings” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 185) “Further signatories of the lawsuit included former deputy Adriano Diogo, president of the São Paulo State Truth Commission, Lúcio Bellentani, Tarcísio Tadeu Garcia, José Braz Sobrinho and Expedito Soares Batista, all former workers at VW do Brasil, and Intercâmbio, Informações, Estudos e Pesquisas (IIEP), an organization that went on to play a key role during the subsequent discovery process.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 185)

“A civil inquiry was opened in 2016, supported by three departments internal to the Brazilian Prosecution Service (MP): the MPF, through the São Paulo Procuradoria Regional dos Direitos do Cidadão (PRDC), the Prosecution Service of the State of São Paulo, and the Public Labour Prosecution Office (MPT), through São Bernardo do Campo’s procuracy.28 In practice, this allowed the discovery process to become a kind of sui generis truth trial, ultimately facilitating the reconstruction of the complicity between the company and the dictatorship.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 186)

This allowed the Federal Public Ministry (MPF), based in São Paulo, to initiate a public civil inquiry in September 2015. The representation that generated the process was signed by all ten existing labor federations. It consists of a petition accompanied by a dossier on the company’s conduct, gathering documents from the State Archive and the National Archive that prove constant correspondence between Volkswagen and the state repressive apparatus, as well as the setup of a security system within the factory that monitored and repressed workers and their organizations. Former workers were heard by the MPF, including metalworker Lúcio Bellentani, who was arrested and tortured inside the factory, and Colonel Adhemar Rudge, head of the company’s Security Department between 1969 and 1991.[31](#footnote31)

While the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office hired a researcher from São Paulo State Research Support Foundation, trought the Institute for Research and Information on Public Policy[32](#footnote32), the desission impacted in news, even in Germany, and the international gerency of the company, under the advice of the Integrity and Legal Affairs Department, decided in November 2016, investigate the accusations. It hired Manfred Grieger, a historian from the German parent company, who visited Brazil to meet with the prosecutor, unionists, researchers, and victims. In 2017, he was replaced by historian Christopher Kopper. The report alleged that the company was forced to expand its industrial park due to military pressure, yet it acknowledged that a former CEO celebrated the kidnapping of union representatives; that low-wage policies were employed; and that a fragile legislative environment was exploited to manipulate labor relations. It also admitted the use of vehicles for military transport and indifference regarding due diligence and background checks for persons linked to the Nazi regime. Other parts of the report presented “gray areas”: they admitted some executives were former Nazi militants but argued their individual behavior was not part of the corporate culture; they admitted FIESP membership but denied financial support; and they questioned the collaboration between the company’s private security and the police.[33](#footnote33)

“In 2018, at the annual assembly of the Association of Critical Volkswagen Shareholders in Germany, Christian Russau, a member of the association and activist, demanded that VW take a stand on the findings in the report, and accused the executive board and board of management with negligence. In his statement, Russau set out the contents of both Kopper and Mingardi’s reports and demanded that the” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 190) “company apologize “in full and in a sincere and public manner to the victim workers \[...\] so that Volkswagen finally assumes its historic responsibility”.61” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 191)

The final report was published at a ceremony in São Bernardo do Campo, focusing the repression history in the factory. The company assumed moral responsibility for the injustices and began negotiating reparations with the victims and the Public Ministry. A commemorative plaque was unveiled, and the President for Latin America used the plural in his speech, assuming collective responsibility. [34](#footnote34)

“On 14 December 2017, the company held a ceremony at its headquarters in São Bernardo do Campo featuring Christopher Kopper, Pablo Di Si (the Argentinian president of Volkswagen in Latin America), and the president of the ABC metalworkers’ union, Wagner Santana, during which the publication of Kopper’s report was announced and a plaque for the victims of the dictatorship was unveiled.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 191)

“In its joint report entitled, “Human Rights, Business and Transitional Justice: The role of the VW do Brasil in political repression during the military dictatorship”, published in 2020 by the Federal Public Prosecutor’s Office,37 the Public Ministry of the State of São Paulo and the Public Ministry of Labor, concludes that the company’s cooperation with the dictatorial regime went well beyond political sympathies or commercial interests” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 187)

Finally, in 2020, the company signed a Conduct Adjustment Agreement (TAC) with the Public Ministry as a form of reparation.[35](#footnote35) “the Compromise of Adjustment Conduct (TAC) was negotiated exclusively by the MP after the civil case started. In other words, the agreement was entirely negotiated and settled between VW do Basil and the MP, but excluded the participation of those entities that had provided the initial impetus.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 193)

“The TAC stipulated a payment of R$ 4.5 million to the Fund for the Defence of Diffuse Rights, and the same amount again to the Special Fund for the Reparation of Injured Diffuse Interests, as well as R$10.5 million to the Memorial for the Struggle for Justice—an initiative developed by the São Paulo chapter of the Brazilian Bar Association (OAB/SP) and the Centre for the Preservation of Political Memory—and the Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP). After the conclusion of the agreement, the company decided to grant the additional amount of R$16,8 million to the Volkswagen Workers’ Association (Heinrich Plagge Association) as “reparations”. The amount paid to the victims was not part of the TAC, although it was included in the case file and subsequent communications made by the MP. In return, the three civil actions filed against VW were closed and any future lawsuits involving these crimes blocked.75” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 193)

The company recognized its responsibility for providing the police with lists of unionized employees. The agreement included funding for the Center for Forensic Anthropology and Archaeology (CAAF) at the Federal University of São Paulo (Unifesp) to research other companies’ links to human rights violations. The agreement involved a disbursement of 36 million reais, preventing further litigation.[36](#footnote36) A research outcome of the reparation measures was a two-volume report on companies’ compliance, that was consequently brought befor prossecutors.[37](#footnote37)

“As such, the company signed the agreement without publicly acknowledging its participation in gross human rights violations.67” (Almeida 2018)

“ccording to the coordinator of the IIEP, Sebastião Neto, Volkswagen also attempted to divide and coopt the solidarity of the workers’ movement, including contacting some of the victims individually to offer them direct compensation and thus undermining the union movement.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 192)

“The agreement can be interpreted from different perspectives. On the one hand, this settlement, unprecedented in Brazil, has played a key role in disclosing the relationship between VW do Brasil and the dictatorial regime.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 193) “From this point of view, the organizations and actors linked to the victims interpreted the agreement with VW do Brasil as a great achievement,” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 193)

“it should serve to launch further investigations into other companies accused of serious human rights violations” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 193)

“innovation” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 181) That's how the authors caracterice the 2020 settlement.

“On the other hand, these same social actors were unequivocal in pointing out the limits of the agreement, including the failure to guarantee a memorial to the workers’ struggles.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 194)

“Despite the fact that memory-work has long been considered a useful transitional justice tool throughout the world to re-build civil society after mass violence,79 the construction of a space of memory –initially considered a non-negotiable outcome—was not included in the final version of the agreement.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 194)

“In addition to the absence of a memorial, the TAC made no mention of VW do Brasil’s responsibility or the payment of direct reparations to affected workers. On the contrary, the agreement made clear that “VW do Brasil enters into this conduct adjustment without acknowledging any responsibility of its own or of its managers, employees or agents for the acts and facts investigated” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 194)

“The trade union organizations that had initially assisted the MPF and contributed to the opening of the inquiry argued that the organizations that were to benefit from VW’s financial contributions had no links to the working class.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 194) “

In addition to these issues, the payments were made “merely as a donation

Despite these critiques, the Federal Prosecutor’s Office for the Rights of the Citizen confirmed the agreement on 15 January 2021,” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 195) “Although it was contested, the TAC was signed, highlighting the payment of R$19.5 million. The remaining R$16.3 million, intended as compensation to affected workers, was not part of the TAC agreement, but was included in the inquiry through a Private Instrument of Donation. R$4.5 million were earmarked for research projects; these funds, managed by Universidade Federal de São Paulo, resulted in a public call for scholars to submit research projects on the subject of corporate complicity during the dictatorship. In work that is still underway, approximately 55 experts are investigating the activities of Petrobras, Fiat, Companhia Docas de Santos, Itaipu, Josapar, Paranapanema, Cobrasma, Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN), Aracruz and Folha de S. Paulo” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 196) “According to the project’s general coordinator, the objective is not limited to academic research, but research “aimed at gathering evidence for the public prosecutor’s office to open legal actions, inquiries or administrative procedures against these companies” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 196)

“In so doing, the company insinuated that it had initiated the investigation itself” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 196)

“The format of the agreement was the outcome of a much activism and a unique set of strategies coordinated and deployed by victims, prosecutors, civil society organizations and trade unions in Brazil and Germany.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 182) “then VW do Brasil’s statement reveals the ambiguity and deficiency of the TAC’s terms” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 197)

“First, the degree of corporate accountability reached—even if insufficient” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 197) “concerted national and transnational activism of victims and their lawyers, human rights organizations, and trade unions. The role of “innovative actors”” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 197)

“Second, the specific investigative work” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 197)

“After the return to democracy, VW’s participation in gross violations of human rights during the dictatorship remained outside the spotlight. Everything began to change in 2014, when the Comissão Nacional da Verdade” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 183) NO TODO NO “Third, the pressure exerted on VW headquarters in Germany was crucial” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 198)

“Fourth, as this case shows, academia can play a significant role in the elucidation of the truth, but it cannot replace knowledge processes carried out by the legal system.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 198)

“Fifth, the commitment of and coordination between the three organs of the Brazilian Prosecution Service” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 198)

Ninth, as the terms of the agreement were not seriously tested against existing human rights standards, the final outcome evinces remarkable lacunae in terms of its ability to achieve any type of lasting transitional justice or strengthen accountability standards in terms of corporate complicity—all of which weakened the social and political legitimacy of the accountability process and its outcome.

“VW do Brasil’s lawyers contested the final report produced by the MP by means of their own 40-page document. The company argued that despite the researcher Christopher Kopper having found VW responsible for human rights violations and complicit with agents of the dictatorship, this was not the position of the company, but only the conclusion of a research. In reference to different parts of the MP’s final report, the company stated that the conclusions were based on assumptions and generalizations, supported only by circumstantial evidence” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 192) almeida 2021

The company’s recognition was, however, incomplete and partial. The investigation was conducted unilaterally, without involving affected workers in discussions on reparations. Furthermore, Kopper’s version suggested that the repression was an individual action carried out by the head of industrial security with only tacit knowledge from management. Workers rejected the recognition ceremony, calling it insufficient. The plaque did not mention the company’s loyalty to the military regime, its collaboration with political police, or the workers arrested and tortured. According to Saad-Diniz, it was a “problematic accountability,” far from what is expected in Corporate Transitional Justice. Regarding the Amazon project, Kopper acknowledged that the company hired directly just a part of the employees and that the “gatos” took the major part, beein recluted from distant regions of the country and subjugated under a debt bondage and unmobilized. Nevertheless, the official report stated that these workers were not under slavery, since they were not merchandise. The accusations of slavery were, under this point of view, a metaphore. Nevertheless, where the company has failed was in not supervising the business good practices in its chain production.[38](#footnote38)

When the discussion about a possible agreement between the company and the Public Ministry began was made public, preist Rezende Figueira, by that moment professor on human rights at Rio de Janeiro’s federal university and coordinator of a commission to study modern slave labor, called to the prosecuttors of Labor Public Ministry of Brazil and then brought over thousand pages of documentation compiled by the Pastoral Land Commission. The scope was enormous. There were detailed testimonies from dozens of workers and their families. The dossier identified 69 alleged victims, with testimonies spanning 1977 to 1987. There were notarized declarations, police statements, court filings and lawmaker reports, alongside decades-old press clippings in Portuguese, French and German. As Rezende Figueira sid, memories fade and blur, he says. But a document makes an official imprint. It can be disputed, but it does not change. [39](#footnote39)

Nevertheless, the challenge for the prosecuttors and for Rezende was not only to process all the papers, but to get in contact with the former workers, needed to gave their testimonies before courts. Some died on the ranches and were buried in clandestine cemeteries, according to discoveries of human remains. Others were too ashamed to return home “poorer than they’d left,” Rezende said, and built new lives elsewhere. Many more, he believes, didn’t see themselves as victims, but debtors. They never said a word to anyone.[40](#footnote40) But a researcher’s will have allowed, after a very difficult investigacion, reach some of the victims, 14 over 69 of the victims Rezende could interview in the eighties. For greater strength in the case, a lot of historical research was available.[41](#footnote41)

In May 2022, the Labor Public Ministry of Brazil (MPT) summoned the company for the slavery case at the Cristalino estate. Finally, the federal lawsuit alleged “hundreds” of victims, being exploited as slave labor and under human trafficking on a scale that was “generalized and systemic”. Due to the Amnesty Law, the prosecution took place in a labor court, not a criminal one. Labor courts can order financial compensation and declare violations but cannot impose criminal penalties. Nevertheless, Tthe legal strategy focused on arguing that slavery—like crimes against humanity—constitutes an imprescriptible violation of international law. This represented an innovative extension of the doctrine of imprescriptibility to corporate actors for labor violations and means that in Brazil, the crime of “reducing someone to conditions analogous to slavery” has no statute of limitations.

The company appealed on various grounds, questioning the imprescriptibility and arguing that it had already signed a prior agreement recognizing complicity with the dictatorship. But, as preist Rezende and Rafael García stated: the enslavement of human beings is a crime listed in Article 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, considered an absolute evil and a serious violation of human rights and, therefore, imprescriptible. Thus, no circumstances justify it, according to the European and Inter-American international human rights systems.[42](#footnote42) Discussing also with Kopper’s conclusions, ownership of a person is not and never has been the central element of legislation dealing with the configuration of contemporary slave labour since the Proclamation of the Republic, but rather dignity, as the Federal Supreme Court has ruled on several occasions.[43](#footnote43) During the trial, many victims finally gave testimony. Beyond them, many others declared before reporters.[44](#footnote44) Before press, Volkswagen stated that it “will continue to seek legal certainty in the Brazilian courts” and that “with a 72-year legacy, the company consistently upholds the principles of human dignity and strictly complies with all applicable labor laws and regulations. Volkswagen reaffirms its unwavering commitment to social responsibility, which is intrinsically linked to its conduct as a legal entity and employer”.[45](#footnote45)

By that moment, after the coup attempt in 2023 following the re-election of Lula, a renewal political context emerged, even though the Amnesty Law was never repealed.

In April 2010, the Federal Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of the Amnesty Law.34 Conversely, that same year, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, in Gomes Lund et al. v. Brasil, concluded that the Amnesty Law did not comply with Brazil’s international obligations and ruled that Brazil was required to take the necessary steps to repeal the law and ensure accountability

Nonetheless, civil society groups and institutional actors found creative legal mechanisms to advance accountability.[46](#footnote46) Finally, in 2025, the federal labor court convicted Volkswagen for contemporary slavery, ordering the payment of 165 million reais in collective moral damages, public recognition of responsibility, and a formal apology. The conviction, though complex and late, succeeded in setting a precedent that the prohibition of slavery (exploitation at the Fazenda Vale do Rio Cristalino) is a peremptory norm of Jus Cogens (International Law). This implies that the gravest corporate crimes are imprescriptible, offering a legal tool to combat historical impunity. The judge rejected statute of limitations appeals, explaining that the process was distinct from the repression at the factory. Currently, the company has appealed to a higher court. Besides the company’s denial, some former recruiters and local authorities who knew denouncements but avoid them, alleged oblivion.

After this conviction, four former workers began individual legal proceedings against the company in labor justice, assisted by Coletivo Veredas organization.[47](#footnote47) For Coletivo Veredas, which works to defend workers, individual actions make it possible to reconstruct the memory of each victim and connect the violence of the dictatorship to the violations experienced by rural workers today. Lawyers argue that reparations must recognize not only the past, but also the contemporary impacts of labor violence. The offense –is argued- is not only about the past, but about current Volkswagen denial, thus perpetuating violence.

The ruling did not prevent Brazil from advancing in criminal trials for crimes against humanity, but it stands as a beacon in the fight against contemporary slavery in the Amazon, where thousands are rescued annually from conditions identical to those at Cristalino. Throughout this process, memory and archives were transformed into crucial instruments for the (re)construction of worker history and for confronting the legacy of state and corporate violence. The right to memory and truth is framed as a trans-individual right, aimed not only at ensuring understanding of systematic violations during the military regime (1964–1985) but also at reinforcing collective understanding to combat persistent violations. Special mention is made of judicial archives, particularly those of the Labor Justice system, considered privileged sources for studying labor history, reconstructing citizenship, and understanding the exercise of power—even as courts implemented a policy of mass disposal of closed cases, a true “archival burning,” arguing a lack of space.[48](#footnote48) Finally, the richness of worker archives (union, rural, popular, and Labor Justice archives) is an integral and fundamental element of the struggle for the defense and valuation of the Brazilian historical-documentary heritage, vital for the knowledge of forms of resistance and the achievement of rights.[49](#footnote49)

## After banana’s massacres in Colombia: Chiquita case

Colombia’s path toward transitional justice processes is distinct, largely because the characteristics of its conflict are unique as well. The immense violence, particularly in the rural world, does not only feature the military and guerrillas as primary actors. Paramilitaries, the peasantry in its entirety, Indigenous peoples, and drug trafficking are also integral parts of the conflict.

Given its duration—with the first period of generalized and systematic violence occurring in the mid-20th century—we find early mechanisms for truth and reparation: in 1958, as democracy was restored through a pact between Conservatives and Liberals known as the Frente Nacional (National Front) following the dictatorial government of Rojas Pinilla, an official commission was created to study the causes and dynamics of the internal civil war known as “La Violencia” (1948–1958).[50](#footnote50) At that turn of the decade, Conciliation and Equity Tribunals (Tribunales de Conciliación y Equidad) emerged as a brief state effort to bring justice to those who had lost land in the conflict, restoring it as a mechanism for transitional justice and “conciliation.” This policy ended abruptly in 1961, but it acknowledged the structural problems lying beneath. [51](#footnote51) Subsequently, in 1974, at the close of the National Front period, a social organization—the Committee of Solidarity with Political Prisoners—documented and compiled testimonies on state repressive practices under the pact’s final governments in a “black book,” initiating unofficial memory work.

Unofficial impulses continued, but state instances reappeared a decade later. In 1987, the Commission for the Study of Violence was created, composed of historians and social scientists known as “violentólogos” (specialists in violence), to issue a truth report and analyze the conflict’s causes.[52](#footnote52) In the 1990s, reparation policies began, combining official and unofficial practices. The Colombian Constitution of 1991 marked a paradigm shift by formally recognizing the nation as pluri-ethnic and multicultural, with authority over their ancestral lands, known as Resguardos, which are legally protected as inalienable and collective property, and special jurisdiction. In 1993, Law No. 70 was enacted, recognizing the identity and rights of Black communities to form collectives and occupy ancestral lands. This led to the formation of the Black Communities Process (Proceso de Comunidades Negras), which included workshops for reconstructing cartographies of violence and formulating proposals for justice and reparation. A year later, peasants as a social group obtained their own recognition. Under Law No. 160, “Peasant Reserve Zones” (Zonas de Reserva Campesina or ZRCs) were defined, formally granting rights to secure land and self-governance—a demand from mestizo peasants for the recognition of their rights, seeking an autonomous status similar to that of ethnic communities.[53](#footnote53) However, peasants did not achieve full constitutional recognition until the passage of Legislative Act 01 of 2023.

“CAJAR was established in 1980 by Colombian leftist human rights activists specializing in criminal law (e.g. Eduardo Umaña Mendoza; Luis Guillermo Pérez) with the purpose of defending leftist political militants (including disarmed, former guerilleros) and trade unionists persecuted by state authorities and to enhance the economic, social and cultural rights of marginalized sectors of the society. It is one of the most important anti-impunity NGOs in Colombia, being especially concerned with crimes committed during the ongoing conflict by army officers, security service personnel and economic actors.31 CAJAR promotes a maximalist and confrontational approach to justice. It has opposed the prioritization process of prosecutions as far as military and police officers were concerned32 and continues to see criminal justice as a fundamental means to ensure non-repetition of crimes and forge a peace process that is fair to the victims. In terms of corporate accountability, CAJAR, like ECCHR, litigates cases that particularly concern multinational corporations (e.g. Drummond, Nestlé). For Nestlé case, see Rusescu. (Grosescu, 2019)

It brings such cases to Colombian, international and foreign courts as a means to ensure justice for victims, to sanction corporate human rights misconduct in Colombia and at a global level, and to draw attention towards the inequalities produced by neoliberal economics in the Global South.3” (Grosescu, 2019, p. 8)

This process reflects the emergence of an interest in the conservation and recreation of memories in the midst of conflict, even as violence continued to impact society. These initiatives sought to challenge the silence and indifference toward the armed conflict, aiming to document violent events, honor victims, and demand truth and accountability for atrocities. Unofficial policies proved to have significant reach; grassroots organizations and survivors sought historical clarification regarding responsibility and the repertoires of violence used against them, such as the aforementioned Black Communities Process.

Indeed, new instances of memory and demands for historical accountability emerged. In 2008, under the right-wing government of Álvaro Uribe Vélez and his Democratic Security Pact, the official Historical Memory Group was created to investigate and document emblematic cases of violence. Simultaneously, between 2003 and 2009, the demobilization of the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) took place under the framework of the “Justice and Peace” process. This was a transitional justice process whereby, in exchange for demobilization and participation in truth and reparation exercises, paramilitary leaders received reduced sentences within a special criminal proceeding. [54](#footnote54) Specifically, in 2005, through Law No. 975, the Justice and Peace Tribunals were created to receive “versiones libres” (voluntary statements)—judicial proceedings where prosecutors collected confessions from armed group members as a requirement for receiving legal benefits.

The interesting aspect of these criminal justice processes is that, in their confessions, paramilitaries seeking shorter sentences provided detailed accounts of economic actors who were co-participants or accomplices. This fragmentary information formed the basis for understanding corporate responsibility in paramilitarism. These mentions of corporate complicity were referred to the Attorney General’s Office (Fiscalía General de la Nación or FGN) to initiate investigations, which, in a way, led to the prosecution of third-party civilians, businesspeople, merchants, and landowners. According to academic research, 35 of these sentences issued between 2011 and 2015 included 439 records of corporate complicity. However, these are only a sample collected by judicial officials to recreate the context; the sentences did not include the names of all companies and businesspeople mentioned by paramilitaries in the versiones libres, as the courts were not authorized to initiate criminal proceedings on their own.[55](#footnote55) According to the Attorney General’s Office, as of 2019, out of 16,772 referrals received from these tribunals (filtered into 16,134), 311 third-party civilians were identified. The Transitional Justice Directorate of the Attorney General’s Office began an investigation into corporate complicity against 18 banana businessmen, the Drummond company, and sugar producers from the Urabá Valley. However, these investigations have faced considerable delays.[56](#footnote56)

Throughout this process, official and unofficial truth and reparation policies continued to grow. In 2011, Law No. 1448 (Victims and Land Restitution Law) was enacted, articulating the right of victims to land restitution following experiences of dispossession. That same year, the National Center for Historical Memory (CNMH) was created as the successor to the 2008 commission, with a mission to collect materials documenting the war and human rights violations, leading to the creation of the National Museum of Historical Memory and the National Archive of Human Rights. In 2013, this group published the report ¡Basta Ya\! Colombia: Memories of War and Dignity, emphasizing that impunity (nearly 95% for homicides) was a primary factor in the war’s escalation.[57](#footnote57)

By the following year, peace talks advanced. Since 2012, under the “Legal Framework for Peace,” the Constitution delegated to Congress the issuance of a law to create a “Truth Commission.” Finally, a commission was formed within the framework of this process to contribute to truth and memory. This was formalized in the negotiations between the FARC guerrillas and the national government in a Final Agreement that created the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation, and Guarantees of Non-Repetition, where policies for land access for peasants, Indigenous, and Black communities were established as central. Specifically, three mechanisms were created. First, the Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence, and Non-Repetition (Truth Commission or CEV), aimed at clarifying the truth about the conflict, dignifying victims, seeking voluntary recognition of responsibility, favoring coexistence, and formulating proposals for non-repetition. Second, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP), with the mission to determine those most responsible for the gravest war crimes and crimes against humanity and to sentence them to restorative justice penalties within a transitional due process framework. Third, the Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Disappeared (UBPD), tasked with searching for the disappeared, accompanying families in cemeteries, hillsides, and mass graves.

The CEV began operations in 2018. Its work concluded in 2022 after collecting over 30,000 testimonies (from victims, perpetrators, and experts), documents from memory and justice archives, and academic studies. It presented an extensive national report and numerous regional reports exceeding 10,000 pages, explicitly identifying the “economic model” as a cause of the conflict. [58](#footnote58) Economic actors and companies are mentioned on numerous occasions as perpetrators—financing paramilitaries, producing and/or benefiting from forced displacement, and stigmatizing union activists—and as victims of kidnapping and extortion also.[59](#footnote59)

For example, the Fondo Ganadero de Córdoba is mentioned as part of the livestock sector involved in corporate complicity in the armed conflict. A quarter of the subsectors involved are livestock farmers, especially in Urabá. In 2014, Benito Osorio Villadiego, the former manager of this entity, was arrested along with other board executives for participation in acts of dispossession. Osorio had confessed during the Justice and Peace process. The Fund was accused of allying with paramilitary Vicente Castaño, leader of the AUC, to appropriate 4,000 hectares of land through the forced displacement of 130 families in the Las Tulapas region. Additionally, Benito Molina Laverde, who was in charge of the Fund at the time of the transactions, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to over sixteen years in prison. The Supreme Court confirmed the verdict in August 2018. This case exemplifies how convictions of domestic companies can weaken corporate veto power, as the exposure of links between the Fund and paramilitaries undermined its political influence.[60](#footnote60)

Another emblematic case is the company Urapalma, one of fifteen companies involved in human rights violations through the forced displacement of Afro-Colombian communities in Urabá by paramilitary groups. The case culminated in the criminal conviction of fifteen businesspeople and former company officials in October 2014, with sentences of up to ten years and heavy fines. The court confirmed the conviction on appeal in November 2016. In June 2017, the Court also convicted Antonio Nel Zuñiga-Caballero, a high-ranking executive of the company. The Urapalma case is identified as an instance where perpetrators threatened victims by saying: “if you don’t sell to us now, we will buy the land from your widow.”[61](#footnote61)

The U.S. mining company Drummond, on the other hand, was taken to foreign courts—specifically, a civil court in the United States—accused of financing paramilitary groups and murdering unionists at the mine. In 2013, Jaime Blanco Amaya, a contractor for the company who confessed to participating in the violence scheme, was convicted for these acts. In December 2020, the Colombia’s Attorney General’s Office formally charged the current president of the company in the country, José Miguel Linares, and its former president, Augusto Jiménez. In the indictment, the prosecrutors recorded 3,382 victims of crimes such as murder, forced disappearance, and kidnapping allegedly committed by paramilitaries with the complicity of company executives.[62](#footnote62) Recently, U.S. Federal Court ruled in Drummond’s favor and rejected the accusations.[63](#footnote63) Thus, a striking jurisdictional paradox emerges: while the Colombian prosecution (FGN) continues to build its case on a pattern of systemic complicity, a federal court in the United States has recently ruled that this very claim was a “false narrative”, effectively turning the accusers into the accused.

Back to the CEV’s report, it recommended reparations and institutional reforms for non-repetition, but implementation policies have been partial, and companies often ignore the recommendations. Although the CEV was able to establish a long-term narrative of the violence and highlight its complexity—including corporate actors as part of an official account, contradicting decades of denial—its goal was clarification, not the judicial prosecution of the crimes narrated. A window for truth was opened, but not for justice, a path that proved frustrating for victims.

However, the new official truth must confront other memories. Indeed, tensions were evident when the Peace Agreement was rejected in a referendum two weeks after being signed. [64](#footnote64) The result caused great shock, leading to a rapid renegotiation to revise the agreement and pass it in Congress. At the core was a deep disagreement over the construction of an official truth. Various actors had been building competing memories. For example, the livestock sector has actively participated in shaping historical memory as part of the struggle over the conflict’s narrative.[65](#footnote65) Military and police museums, meanwhile, seek to commemorate soldier-victims and ensure the Armed Forces are not portrayed solely as perpetrators. An April 2017 government decree ordered that a Ministry of Defense representative sit on the board of the CNMH, causing controversy and concern among social movements and victim organizations.[66](#footnote66) At the same time, sectoral, local, and ethnic groups produced their own perspectives, giving meaning to the conflict and reparation policies. The group Hijos e Hijas por la Identidad y la Justicia contra el Olvido y el Silencio (Sons and Daughters for Identity and Justice against Oblivion and Silence) was formed, using various methods to reconstruct memory and fight against oblivion and impunity, including performances, graffiti, art, and music. The National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (ONIC) published its book Time of Life and Death: Memories and Struggles of Indigenous Peoples in Colombia, with assistance from the CNMH, arguing that peace requires rituals, emotional processes, and the decolonization of discourses on peace, justice, and memory, recognizing the impact of violence on the landscape and other living beings.[67](#footnote67)

One case is emblematic for considering the role of these civilian actors: Chiquita Brands. The involvement of this company, successor to the United Fruit Company, dates back to 1959, when it began operating in the Urabá region through two subsidiaries, Banadex and Banacol. Judicial investigations and denunciations indicated that the company made payments to paramilitaries to protect and expand its economic activity. The paramilitary economic project in the region focused primarily on the agricultural sector, including banana and oil palm cultivation.[68](#footnote68) The case has unfolded across three main arenas.

First, in 2007, Chiquita Brands pleaded guilty to criminal charges in the United States for financing the AUC with $1.7 million between 1997 and 2004.[69](#footnote69) It also admitted to paying the FARC guerrilla group. These were groups designated as “foreign terrorist organizations” in the United States.[70](#footnote70) The company argued that its payments were a response to extortion, made in “good faith,” and motivated by “concern for the safety of its employees” who had been threatened. The agreement with the U.S. prosecution involved a $25 million fine to the U.S. government, which in turn agreed not to file further charges against the company. Chiquita committed to establishing an ethics program to ensure the legality of its practices.[71](#footnote71)

In this case of open contention, faced with growing legal pressures, it assumed responsibility through memory actions, such as donating part of its historical archive (primarily photographs) to the Fall River Museum and the Baker Library at Harvard Business School, aiming to build trust and improve its current reputation among stakeholders. Some scholars evaluated this action as example of Historic CSR, particularly for its transition from a history of domination –regardin even the UFCo legacy-, to one of proactive transparency. [72](#footnote72) Conversely, in the late 20th century, Chiquita claimed to have a relatively higher level of unionization in the industry and to collaborate with non-governmental organizations.

Nevertheless, victims received no reparation from that agreement, and the company rejected any proceedings in Colombia. Thus, the path of civil lawsuits was opened also in the U.S. Colombian families of victims of paramilitaries and guerrillas filed claims thousands of claims (from seven thousand families) under the humanitarian international law and differente federal statutes like Alien Tort Statute (ATS) and Colombian civil law, that were finally consolidated by Supreme Court as Mass Tort Litigation before a unique court. In 2018, the company reached an out-of-court settlement with American families who were victims of the FARC, though without admitting guilt. However, after fifteen years, in 2024, a U.S. jury found the company liable and ordered indemnity for the victims whose cases were selected as exemplar (twelve cases, four of which were dismissed because it was nos stated the relationship with AUC’s crimes). This latter event occurred after a federal jury in West Palm Beach, Florida, found the company legally responsible in June 2024 for financing the AUC. As a result, Chiquita was ordered to pay $38.3 million to the families of sixteen peasants murdered by the armed group. This verdict, the first of its kind to hold a major U.S. corporation responsible for complicity in human rights violations abroad, sets a fundamental precedent regarding the obligation of companies to prioritize human life over profit, despite the company’s announced intention to appeal.[73](#footnote73) Nevertheless, the rest of the cases are still running.[74](#footnote74)

Thirdly, a criminal conviction was reached in Colombia’s courts in 2025. This outcome unfolded also from a long way to justice. In 2012, a prosecutor attempted to halt the investigation of the executives, whom he considered victims of extortion. In December 2016, the Attorney General’s Office declared that the financing of paramilitary groups was a crime against humanity. In August 2018, the prosecutors formally charged fourteen executives (including Colombian nationals and U.S. citizens) with financing paramilitary groups, elevating the case to the second level of the accountability scale. Finally, in a landmark 2025 ruling, a Colombian court sentenced seven high-ranking executives of Chiquita Brands to prison terms of up to 13 years for their role in financing paramilitary groups through front organizations.[75](#footnote75)

The Colombian NGO Forjando Futuros, led by its director Gerardo Vega, played a pivotal role in bridging local and international efforts by providing critical evidence from the Urabá region to EarthRights International for the U.S. litigation, while simultaneously spearheading the legal strategy in Colombia that prioritized criminal accountability over financial settlements. The legal strategy against Chiquita Brands was divided across two distinct jurisdictions, involving different groups of victims with complementary goals. In the United States, the litigation centered on a civil trial in Florida where eight families were selected as 'bellwether cases' to represent thousands of claimants; this process resulted in a landmark $38.3 million verdict for damages. Conversely, in the Colombian criminal trial, the victims' representatives made a strategic decision to waive their right to financial compensation. By renouncing the economic claim within that specific proceeding, they aimed to streamline the judicial process and prioritize a swift criminal conviction, successfully securing 13-year prison sentences for several high-level executives.[76](#footnote76). Both Chiquita Brands and the convicted executives have filed appeals, so the judgments are not final. One of the higlihts of the judicial investigation was regarding the historical analysis droven by political scientist. [77](#footnote77) In the case, it was proved that the victims were killed by AUC and that very probable that Chiquita supported financially and logistically the AUCs, causing, according to two Colombians norms, that Chiquita caused harm. And the company couldn’t prove that it was subjected to extorsiom and inminent danger, while, on the contrary, they took advantage to accumulate land sold under pressure and with infimate prizes.

In addition to the prison sentences, the Colombian court imposed a global fine of approximately $3.4 million on the convicted executives, with the funds earmarked for the judicial system rather than direct victim compensation. But the Forjando Futuros’ strategy is to seek beyond this monetary compensation. According to a formal complaint by the Forjando Futuros Foundation, the multinational corporation Chiquita Brands allegedly transferred 73 land parcels—totaling more than 4,000 hectares—to companies such as Banadex and Banacol in Colombia. The NGO, which represents victims of the armed conflict, contends that these transfers were a deliberate attempt to prevent the land from being used for victim reparations, who are currently calling on the national government and President Gustavo Petro to intervene before the U.S. Department of the Treasury, in order to ensure that the resources and sanctions levied against the multinational are allocated directly toward comprehensive reparation and land restitution.[78](#footnote78)

# Third movement

### De Greiff, P. (2006). Justice and reparations. In Handbook of Reparations. Oxford University Press.

“While I have absolutely no interest in launching a critique of legal approaches to transitional problems, the juridical approach to reparations is problematic; it is so not because of its juridical nature per se, but because it is an understanding that has been developed, for good reasons, with an eye to the resolution of relatively isolated cases.1 By contrast, the aim of this chapter—and of this research project as a whole—is to think about what is fair, proper, and efficient in the resolution of massive and systematic cases of abuse.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 451)

“I argue instead in favor of thinking about justice in the context of massive cases in terms of the achievement of three goals, namely, recognition, civic trust and social solidarity” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 451)

“that there are two different contexts of use of the term ‘reparations’” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“The first context is the juridical one, particularly, the context of international law, in which the term is used in a wide sense to refer to all those measures that may be employed to redress the various types of harms that victims may have suffered as a consequence of certain crimes” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Restitution” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Compensation” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Rehabilitation” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“Satisfaction and guarantees of nonrecurrence” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 452)

“The other context in which the term ‘reparations’ is frequently used is in the design of programs (i.e. more or less coordinated sets of reparative measures) with massive coverage” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“in a narrower sense. Here ‘reparations’ refers to the attempts to provide benefits directly to the victims of certain types of crimes. In this sense, programs of reparations do not take truth-telling, criminal justice, or institutional reform, for example, as parts of reparations.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“programs” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“two fundamental distinctions are between material and symbolic reparations” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“between the individual and the collective distribution” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Material reparations may assume the form of compensation, that is, of payments in either cash or negotiable instruments, or of service packages, which may in turn include provisions for education, health, and housing.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Symbolic reparations may include, for instance, official apologies, rehabilitation, the change of names of public spaces, the establishment of days of commemoration, the creation of museums and parks dedicated to the memory of victims, etc” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“the breadth of the legal understanding” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“restricted use of the term characteristic of discussions about the design of programs” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“I defend the use of the term ‘reparations’ in the narrower sense described above, that is, to refer to measures that provide benefits to victims directly” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 453)

“Courts do not have an option but to consider each case in its own terms.5 By contrast, whoever is in charge of designing a massive program of reparations has to respond to a much wider and complex universe of victims, and has to employ, per force, methods and forms of reparation suitable to these circumstances.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 454)

“There are two fundamental reasons that justify thinking about reparations in relation to a broader political agenda rather than in terms of a narrowly conceived juridical approach” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 454)

“In general, it can be said that they agree on the following interpretation of ‘fair and adequate compensation’ and other cognate terms: the ideal behind reparations is ‘full restitution’ (restitutio in integrum), that is, the restoration of the status quo ante. In cases where this is impossible, for example, when a death has occurred, compensation is required, and this means, for the Inter-American Court, for instance, that material and moral damages are called for” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 455)

“But the fact that there is no transitional or postconflict reparations program that has managed to compensate victims in proportion to the harm they suffered, that the very quantification of these harms is problematic, and that even the idea that this should be attempted might generate unfulfillable expectations, are not the only problems that accompany the effort to import this criterion of justice to the domain of massive programs.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 457)

“In the case of massive abuse, however, an interest in justice calls for more than the attempt to redress the particular harms suffered by particular individuals. Whatever criterion of justice is defended must be one that has an eye also on the preconditions of reconstructing the rule of law, an aim that has a public, collective dimension.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 457)

“There are three specific aims, closely related to the notion of justice, but particularly salient during times of transition, that I think can help structure an answer to the question of what is fair in terms of reparations.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 459)

“One of the main aims of transitional justice is to return (or, in some cases to establish anew) the status of citizens to individuals.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“To the extent that a reparations program aims to contribute to the achievement of justice, and that recognition is both a condition and a consequence of justice, this links reparations and recognition. In order to recognize individuals as citizens it is necessary to recognize them as individuals first. That is to say, it is necessary to recognize them not only as members of groups (as important as this might be), but also as irreplaceable and unsubstitutable human beings.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“Truth-telling provides recognition in ways that are perfectly familiar, and which are still probably best articulated by the old difference proposed by Thomas Nagel between knowledge and” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 460)

“acknowledgment, when he argued that although truth commissions rarely disclose facts that were previously unknown, they still make an indispensable contribution in acknowledging these facts.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“In summary, reparations contribute to justice not only because they complement transitional justice measures generally, but because they do so in a particular way, namely by helping to keep those other measures from fading into irrelevance for most victims.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“Another legitimate aim of a program of reparations as an instrument of justice is the formation or the restoration of trust among citizens.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 461)

“Just like recognition, civic trust is at one and the same time a condition and a consequence of justice.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 462)

“Again, for victims, reparations constitute a manifestation of the seriousness of the state and of their fellow citizens in their efforts to reestablish relations of equality and respect.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 463)

“Former victims of abuse are given a material manifestation of the fact that they are now living among a group of fellow citizens and under institutions that aspire to be trustworthy.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“Just like civic trust, solidarity also comes in different types and degrees. Social solidarity is the type of empathy” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“And this implies having an interest in the interests of others.39 This is precisely what social solidarity is.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 464)

“Another advantage of thinking about reparations in explicitly political terms, rather than in terms of judicial considerations, is that it places another thorny issue in the design of reparations programs in its proper context. I am talking about the question of finances. A political perspective on reparations introduces some clarity in discussions about financing strategies. Basically, this happens because it takes the question of finances out of the exclusive domain of technicians and lawyers and returns it where it should properly lie, namely, in the domain of competing social priorities.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 466)

“Reparations programs should display what I call integrity or coherence, which I analyze into two different dimensions, internal and external.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“with criminal justice, truth-telling, and institutional reform.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“Reparations programs ought to display integrity or coherence in another dimension: a program of reparations, if it is to attain its proper goals, must always be a complex program that distributes different benefits, and the different components of the plan ought to be mutually coherent. That is, the program ought to be internally coherent. Most reparations programs distribute more than one kind of benefit. These may include symbolic as well as material reparations, and each of these categories may include different measures and be distributed individually or collectively.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 467)

“following scheme” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Symbolic Measures” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Service Packages” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 468)

“Individual Grants” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 469)

“4. Development and Social Investment” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 469)

“Here it is worth distinguishing between reparations in their strict sense, and the reparative effects of other programs. Development, just like criminal justice, for example, may have reparative effects.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“That is to say, the program must be internally and externally coherent, and it must avoid reproducing and perpetuating unjust social structures. In the last analysis, a transitional government in a poor country will most likely propose a development plan, and ideally, the program of reparations must also cohere with that plan.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“It has insisted on the importance of individual reparations, allowing all the while that there are situations in which a collective dimension is perfectly proper.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“The three goals around which I have defined the requirements of justice for these cases require the exercise of political judgment, understood in the broad sense of a judgment about what is both in the common good and feasibly achievable.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 471)

“We do well, then, in asking ourselves seriously what justice in reparations requires.” (De Greiff, 2006, p. 472)

“The history of European colonization and its impact on Indigenous Peoples from the American continent is well known. Genocide, massacres, disease, slavery and forced labour, looting and displacement, the kidnapping of women and children, imprisonment, policies of forced assimilation, and criminalization of protests and resistance “are deeply rooted in modern societies, and their effects continue to exist and determine the lives of Indigenous Peoples in many countries” (Stavenhagen, 2009: 64). Today, racism against Indigenous Peoples and the structural inequalities that affect them reveal the persistence of political exclusion patterns, social marginalization and cultural discrimination in Brazil and Canada. Despite this legacy of enduring historical injustice, they have resisted and struggled today for their right to truth, justice, reparation and the guarantee of non-repetition of violence in the present. In recent decades, the struggles of Indigenous Peoples for historical justice and reparation have gained visibility. Truth and Reconciliation Commissions have been established in several countries of the Americas, as necessary forums for processes of democratic transition and/or overcoming the violence and crimes of the past to promote reconciliation. In Guatemala, Peru, Paraguay, Canada, the United States of America, Colombia, Mexico, Chile and Brazil, the commissions have dealt with violence cases against Indigenous Peoples. The efforts to investigate these mechanisms and the general systematization and consolidation of the obtained data have allowed the evaluation of the size and seriousness of the acts of violence against Indigenous Peoples in the Americas.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3)

### Obuah, E. E. (2016). The Politics of Reparations: The Academic Epistemic Communities and the Implications of Reparation Debate on African-American and Africa’s Quest for Reparations. Open Journal of Political Science, 06(01), 44–52. <https://doi.org/10.4236/ojps.2016.61005>

“Following the activism of reparation, Verdun (1993) identified four stages/phases of the reparation movement, and Brooks (2004) has divided these activisms into three main periods: the slavery, the post-slavery, and the post-Holocaust periods.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“the post-Holocaust era has witnessed the reemergence and revivalization of the moral and legal arguments in favor and against reparations.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“Evidence of this growth and awareness on reparation debate, especially in the case of reparation to African-American descendants was the proliferation of reparation litigations in US courts.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“But the arguments for reparations to Africa are strong based on the fact that the slave trade led to the kidnapping of millions of Africans who were sold as slaves to the New World. Also during the periods of slave trade and colonialism, Africa’s economic, social and political life were dislocated and distorted.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 45)

“While the opponents of reparation acknowledge that African Americans have been systematically disadvantaged as a result of slavery and its aftermath, they argue that reparation presents a plethora of technical problems” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“the prohibitive cost of reparation, or the problems of determining who would represent African Americans and the legitimacy of such group” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“In broad terms, there are two epistemic communities, namely those opposed to reparation, and those in favor of reparations. Within the epistemic community favorable to reparations, there are first, those who favor the use of tort model hence referred to as activism and confrontationalism in their approach, and second, those who support reparation not from the narrow legalisms and monetary compensation which characterize most conventional debate but more significantly on how America can redeem its racial injuries by focusing the debate on atonement. And the third group consists of those who recognize the need for apology but are very skeptical and have no faith if the African Americans would ever be compensated for injuries incurred during slavery and Jim Crow period because of the herculean legal obstacles” (Obuah, 2016, p. 46)

“The confrontational model is primarily characterized by demand for monetary payment from white to blacks” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“This model not only made a case for monetary compensation to African-Americans, but more significant, to Africa for enslavement of Africans during the trans-Atlantic slave trade and the massive exploitation of the African continent by European nations during the colonial period.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“Therefore, legal approaches ranging from individual law suits to collective class action suit are preferred modus operandi” (Obuah, 2016, p. 48)

“According to Miller (2004) the conversational model is a way of re-characterizing acts or situations in ways that are morally or politically significant. It is a model which at a minimum makes it impossible for citizens to ignore the contributions of slavery and de jure segregation to the character of the American society.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 49)

“But by far the most ardent proponent of the atonement model is Brooks (2004) who tried persuasively to reframe the reparation debate from the tort-dominant model to a forward-looking model in which the United States Government must make sure the pangs and deaths of slaves have posthumous meaning by making reparation and apology believable by a tangible act of material realty. In trying to demonstrate and establish the connection between slavery and position of blacks in contemporary America, Brooks (2004: pp. 36-87) argued that there were evidence of capital deficiencies (social and human capital) linking past conditions of slavery and Jim Crow period to deficiencies among contemporary African American population.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 49)

“While the former was directed toward the individual victims or victims’ families, the latter was directed toward the victims’ group(s), designed for the benefit of the group and to nurture the group’s self-empowerment and aid in the social and cultural transformation of the nation.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“he atonement model while not eliminating the courts, prescribes a conversational and legislative approach by the communities involved in which redress/reparation is presented as a means of accounting for responsibilities as citizens to each other and acknowledging the responsibility” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“interest and support for Africa’s quest for reparation gathered momentum in the 1990s with the hosting of the First Pan-African Congress on Reparation in Abuja, Nigeria, the preparatory regional conference in 2001 in Dakar, and the UN World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001 in Durban, South Africa” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“that slave trade, particularly of Africa, was a unique tragedy in the history of humanity, crime against humanity which was unparalleled not only because of its abhorrent barbarism, but also in terms of its enormous magnitude, its institutionalized nature, its transnational dimension, and especially its negation of the essence of the human nature of the victims;” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“that the consequences of this tragedy, accentuated by those of colonialism and apartheid, have resulted in substantial and lasting economic, political and cultural damage to the African peoples and are still present in the form of damage caused to the descendants of the victims by the perpetuation of prejudice against Africans in the continent and peoples of African descent in the Diaspora” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“As articulated by Gifford (1993) this generation of scholarship is convinced that Africa has a compelling case for reparation for the slave trade and colonialism on the following grounds:  that the enslavement of Africans was a crime against humanity as defined by the Charter of Nuremberg Tribunal and the International Criminal Court;” (Obuah, 2016, p. 50)

“The literature on reparation is rich and diverse as well as the academic communities.” (Obuah, 2016, p. 51)

## Very distant past violences reparation path

Neither justice nor human rights are given facts. The reality that recent acts of massive violence are remembered and investigated—and, furthermore, that they cross the threshold into the field of justice—are processes that must be explained. That claims for violence from more than half a century, a century, or even 150 years ago advance in their wake deserves more curious attention. It requires many questions. What makes it possible for the arm of justice to stretch through the portal of time? Why justice? How justice? Who demands it? Are memory and research not enough? Are there other political forms of reparation for such distant events?

There is a significant and growing body of academic research in law, history, anthropology, literature, and cultural studies that has exhaustively documented—with abundant argumentation—the massive crimes and spoliation suffered under colonialism, as well as the detrimental effects and benefits enjoyed in the present.

In 2013, the Caribbean countries (CARICOM) initiated a request for reparations for the genocide of native peoples and slavery, approving the Ten-Point Reparation Plan, which was embodied in various subsequent initiatives, such as the formation of a CARICOM Reparations Commission. In 2020, these proposals were presented to the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council as part of a “sustainable development” agenda and progress toward “a century of peace and justice.”

In 2021, the first CARICOM-Africa summit was held: it was decided to propose at the highest global level an agenda to fight racism, commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the 2001 UN World Conference against Racism, and jointly demand reparations at the United Nations. That same year, Barbados became a republic by removing Elizabeth II as Head of State after nearly four hundred years of British colonization, reviving claims for reparations. In March and April 2022, visits by heirs to the throne were met with protests and petitions for reparation in Belize, Jamaica, the Bahamas, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Antigua and Barbuda, and Saint Lucia.

In 2022, the then Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro created the Presidential Commission for Historical Truth, Justice, and Reparation for Colonial Rule and its Consequences in Venezuela. A similar request was made in 2022 by the Vice President of Colombia, Francia Márquez, to repair the crimes of slavery perpetrated by colonialist states against African and Afro-descendant populations over several centuries during the colonial era. In Mexico, marking five centuries since the fierce conquest of Tenochtitlan and the bicentennial of independence from Spain, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador formalized the return of three thousand hectares of land in Sonora to the Yaqui people and promised the restitution of another 20,000. Furthermore, he announced legal actions and infrastructure works—such as access to running and potable water—and offered an apology to these peoples for the marginalization, abuses, and injustices committed during the republican era.

In 2021, Canada celebrated its first “Day for Truth and Reconciliation” with marches and televised events across the country. This memory policy focused on the Indigenous victims of the hundred-plus residential schools—mostly managed by the Catholic Church—that operated between the late 19th century and the 1970s, which were part of a systematic policy of “cultural genocide” against Indigenous people. This initiative recognizes a path started in 2008 with the creation of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission which, after years of research and debate, made nearly one hundred recommendations for reparative policies.

“The core of their mission was to document the injustices and intergenerational traumas experienced by direct and indirect victims, beginning the process of healing the consequences of “cultural genocide”1, and seeking reconciliation” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3) “It also included 94 Calls to Action aimed at correcting the legacy of residential schools and assisting the reconciliation process.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 8)

“However, the events promoted by the TRC in Canada were not attended by the abusers.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 8)

“The National Truth Commission (CNV) in Brazil, created in 2012, aimed to investigate the crimes and human rights violations during the military dictatorship from 1946 to 1988. After a claim by the Indigenous Peoples themselves, the crimes committed against them were included in the CNV’s investigations.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 3)

“Brazil’s transitional scenario finally consolidated through the institution of a CNV, led to the rediscovery of a series of documents proving that Indigenous Peoples were victims of the military dictatorship and probably the most important and least reported victims of that period, given the violence suffered during development projects implemented by military governments. Among the documents found, the publication of the so-called Figueiredo Report4 was fundamental for the CNV to realize that the conflict and persecution against Indigenous Peoples was a political issue and was due to a development model based on the expropriation and theft of indigenous lands.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 10) “Supposedly destroyed in a fire at the Ministry of Agriculture, the report was found by Marcelo Zelic almost intact at the Museum of the Indian in Rio de Janeiro in April 2013, with over preserved 7,000 pages (Zema & Zelic, 2020).” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 11)

“In addition to the Figueiredo Report, indigenous people made other accusations to the National Truth Commission group about the existence of concentration camps, torture centers, and illegal prisons for indigenous people during the military dictatorship.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 11)

“The CNV recognized the Brazilian State’s responsibility, by direct action or omission, for the expropriation of illegally occupied indigenous lands during the period under review and other severe violations of human rights against these populations, ending up recommending thirteen actions to the Brazilian State” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 12)

“Despite promises to transform colonial relations and the fact that both final reports ratified the Canadian and Brazilian states’ responsibility for the genocide of thousands of Indigenous Peoples, these truth commissions were not capable to satisfactorily address the past and to stop the continuity of structural violence affecting them.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 13)

“none of the Canadian apologies were assertive enough to transform the colonial relations with Indigenous Peoples. Despite the concrete ceremonial measures and widespread publicity, none of them morally involved the perpetrators, nor were felt with sincerity by the indigenous survivors.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 14)

“To make these symbolic gestures less empty, an apology must be combined with a systematic review of the past, to hold institutions and individuals directly involved in human rights violations accountable, and recognize self-determination, not to mention that any discussions or gestures of reconciliation must be preceded by real acts of restitution” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 14)

“The CNV was expected to provoke a more open public debate on the military dictatorship crimes in Brazil. However, this did not happen. Shortly after the final report’s publication with thirteen recommendations for reparations to Indigenous Peoples, they quickly fell into oblivion by the public authorities, and the matter also disappeared from the press. None of the thirteen recommendations were implemented by the Brazilian state” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 15)

“There is a kind of prohibition on the memory of crimes committed against Indigenous Peoples throughout history. This forbidden memory encourages the perpetuation or repetition of acts of violence and barbarity already observed in the past.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 15)

“Alejandro Castillejo-Cuéllar’s theoretical proposal for a Critical Studies of Transitions Program (2014, 2017) invites us to think “about the dialectics between the fractures and continuities” of the Brazilian and Canadian “transition scenarios” in order to understand how “these processes coexist with various forms of violence creating new sociabilities.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 4)

“The notion of “historical justice” employed here encompasses the four pillars of transitional justice: justice, truth, reparation, and the guarantee of non-repetition, but seeks to go further. Starting with the indigenous movements critiques on the “transitional justice” and the colonial way in which reconciliation has been carried out, we propose the notion of “historical justice” as a broader category for thinking the struggles of Indigenous Peoples for justice, truth, reparation, and the guarantee of non-repetition, drawing attention to their relationship with their historical struggle for the defense of territories and for social justice. It is a category that considers the denial of the right to history, truth, and memory to Indigenous Peoples as a usurpation of their right to self-determination and a denial of their own humanity. Finally, the notion of historical justice implies understanding the production of indigenous invisibility as a purposeful act with important political consequences.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 4)

“We highlight the “political dimension” (Garapon, 2008: 12) that Indigenous Peoples’ demands for reparation assume when they claim concrete and positive means to eliminate historical injustices’ traces.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5)

“Many truth commissions came with requests for forgiveness from authorities.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5) “The clarification of the truth and the search for justice are considered necessary steps towards reconciliation.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5)

“CastillejoCuéllar moves further from the technical-juridical arsenal and the legal language that predominate in the field of studies on transitional justice, without abandoning it, towards an anthropological perspective, proposing a critical look and a new form of reading to what he calls “transitional scenarios”” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 5) ““transitional scenario” as a social and cultural phenomenon, a “liminal moment” in which “the promise of a new society” emerges through the multiple forms and mechanisms that the “social imagination of the future” assume” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 6)… pero no hay algo parecido en Argentina respect de estos casos históricos.

“Or yet, how can we talk about reconciliation if the violence and structural causes of conflicts are still present?” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 6)

“The perspective of the Critical Studies of Transitions proposes to think about liminality, to consider longterm violence and to identify the continuities in its dialectics with ruptures, in order to detect the tensions that they reflect when individuals or peoples interconnect in the present with larger historical processes, to create a future.” (Zema et al., 2021, p. 7)

In Australia, the government recently announced compensation for thousands of Indigenous people who, during their childhood, were removed from their families and confined in “white” homes (the so-called “Stolen Generation,” estimated at about 100,000 people). The Labor government apologized for these state crimes, choosing terms such as “healing” and “reconciliation,” which include the possibility for victims to tell their stories publicly and receive a direct apology from government authorities.

On the other hand, claims for economic reparation and the right to truth have been made by the Herero and Nama communities of Namibia against Germany for crimes committed at the beginning of the 20th century. In 2021, the German government announced its willingness in principle to carry out substantial returns of the so-called “Benin Bronzes,” preserved in German museums with specific indications of their provenance, in addition to initiating the first returns to Nigeria to be exhibited in the new EMOWAA museum (Edo Museum of West African Art).

“La restitución de bienes culturales es una rama de la diplomacia cultural que ha adquirido relevancia en los últimos años en el ámbito de las relaciones culturales internacionales, en buena medida, a partir del impulso de los movimientos anticolonialistas.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “A la par de las reparaciones económicas, consulares, entre otras, la reparación al daño colonial desde la cultura resulta particularmente necesaria pues apela a la destrucción más profunda de los pueblos: la cultura en sí misma.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “sucedido durante el Reparto de África en el siglo xix. Valiéndome del caso de los Bronces de Benín, hurtados por el Reino Unido durante la expedición punitiva de 1897, y tratándose de esculturas y figuras de latón, bronce y otros materiales, propiedad del Reino de Benín, hoy provincia del estado de Edo, en Nigeria” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 361) “Cabe resaltar que la naturaleza de estas políticas es de corte más bien moral, pues no existe sustento legal internacional que opere en favor de restituir dichos objetos culturales.” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 363) “En el caso que nos ocupa, la restitución es reparación y viene de la voluntad del país poseedor (y de sus instituciones culturales)” (Barrera López, 2023, p. 363)

“For example, the Hererro community in Namibia has instituted a legal claim against German companies seeking reparations for the enslavement and destruction of their tribe. The lawsuit alleges that imperial Germany (which colonized Namibia in the early twentieth century) had formed a "brutal alliance" with German industry and engaged in enslavement, extermination, forced labor, medical experimentation, and other crimes in order to advance common financial interests. See Hererros Sue German Firm for Reparations, BUSINESS DAY, Sept. 6, 2001, available at http://allafrica.com/storiesl200109060457/html (last visited Oct. 9, 2001). For a description of German colonization in Southwest Africa, see A Bloody History: Namibia's Colonization,BBC NEWS, Aug. 29, 2001, available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/africa/newsidl514000/1514 856.stm (last visited Oct. 9, 2001).” (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 131)

“Between 2011 and 2012, two events resurrected Britain’s and Germany’s colonial history back into the public eye. In April 2011, Mau Mau victims from Kenya travelled to Britain to ask for “compensation for the harms they had suffered in British detention camps” (Collste 2015: 108). Subsequently, a UK court awarded the Mau Mau victims the right to sue in British courts. In September 2011, the Herero and Nama peoples of Namibia travelled to Germany to “bring home 20 skulls that had been brought to Germany after the genocide” in 1904, which had been used for “supposed scientific studies aimed at underpinning the doctrine of racial superiority of Europeans over Africans” (Knight 2011). Both these events sparked debates on reparations for crimes that were committed long ago (see also articles by Rolston and Ní Aoláin, and Atiles-Osoria in this volume).” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 369)

“The Herero tribe attempted to seek redress through the US court system on various occasions. The Herero filed suit against Deutsche Bank5 for funding the imperial German government during the time of the genocide. The lawsuit sought “compensation to buy land from white farmers” and “a formal apology from the German government”” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “The timing of the first lawsuit coincided with a movement in Namibia for land reform. The Herero attempt at filing judicial lawsuits was to avoid the forceful land grabs from White farmers that were taking place in Zimbabwe and South Africa (McGreal 2001).” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “In 2001, the Herero People’s Reparations Corporation filed suit for a total of US$4 billion against the German government, Deutsche Bank, Terex Corporation and Weormann Line. In 2004, after the case was moved to the Federal District Court, the Court determined that the Herero had no “statutory basis for asserting jurisdiction over Woermann Line” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 377) “In 2006, the Appeals Court in New Jersey upheld the lower court’s dismissal of the Herero claim for “brutally employed slave labor and \[running\] its own concentration camp”” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 378)

“we outline a formula for how courts can address reparations in a meaningful manner for colonial state crimes.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379) “What are the appropriate remedies for colonial state crimes such as genocide and crimes against humanity? Reparations are broad and can include anything from therapy for victims, through to monetary compensation, symbolic apology or memorials. States and scholars raise three large objections for issuing reparations for colonial state crimes. These objections are as follows: first, the actual perpetrators are not present to be held accountable for their actions; second, the victims who would have been afforded reparations are no longer alive to receive compensation and third, the crimes we speak of today did not exist at the time of the commission of colonial state crimes” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379)

“In close to 100 per cent of the cases arising from colonialism, it is likely that the perpetrator was an agent or representative of the state” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 379). What about companies? “Whether the perpetrator is alive is only a question that is relevant for the purposes of assigning criminal liability to punish an individual for their specific actions. However, civil liability could also be assigned to the state as a whole for gross human rights violations and crimes that have been perpetrated,” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380). But also within criminal field.

“while the descendants of victims of crimes against humanity and genocide bring forward claims, reparations are even more vital. One of the largest impacts these groups have faced is the loss of valuable land they once possessed. The impact of state colonial crimes that once targeted these peoples continues in economic and social terms.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380)

“Although international criminal law had not reached full doctrinal maturity in the late 1800s, international law, in its initial stages still provided for reparative justice and/or compensation for aggrieved parties. It is important to note that even 100 years ago, customary law provided for individual compensation” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380) “In 1796, for example, the United States Supreme Court found that private individuals had the right to compensation for acts that had occurred during war.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 380) “The formula would be applied on a case-by-case basis. It includes a determination of what state crimes took place, whether the state crimes that took place have a continued impact on remaining victims and survivors, and if so, what kinds of reparations would be appropriate to bring a holistic redress to the crimes that took place.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382) “Whatever reparations are determined to provide holistic redress should then be given by the offending state directly to the victims and those reparations should provide a direct and ultimate benefit to the survivors.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382) “it is important that the reparations provided offer a holistic redress.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 382)

“In the case of the Mau Mau, Herero, and Nama peoples, appropriate reparations may include a symbolic and genuine apology” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383) “Outside of an apology, reparations may further include opportunities such as educational scholarships for descendants of victims for education to assist with efforts in eradicating poverty. It may also include monetary restitution, designated as restitution for crimes committed even though monetary compensation cannot erase the pains of the past (Minow 1998: 117) and the return of all cultural artefacts.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“Finally, in many cases, memorials attributed to honour victims of crimes would be appropriate.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“United Nations “Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law” issued in 2005.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383) “While some reference is made to Convention as far back as 1907, the basic principles may not be applied to colonial state crime cases. Therefore, courts should ensure that victims and survivors of grave colonial crimes should be represented directly.” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 383)

“Protection of victim and survivor rights during legal proceedings is perhaps an area of international criminal law that needs growth” (Menachery Paulose and Rogo, 2018, p. 384)

Belgium, France, and the Netherlands receive similar claims. Belgium’s highest powers, including King Philippe, have led various reparation measures, beginning in 2020 with the creation of a Special Parliamentary Commission of inquiry into the Belgian colonial past, which presented an expert report recommending reparation measures, apologies, and the return of objects and human remains, such as those of the former leader Patrice Lumumba. In 2021, the government of the Netherlands announced its intention to initiate reparation policies and return cultural heritage objects stolen during the colonial era to their countries of origin, following the publication by the Council of Culture of the report “Colonial Collection and a Recognition of Injustice.” In 2021, the African Union Commission organized a continental expert workshop on the “Restitution of Cultural Property and Heritage” at the Museum of Black Civilizations in Dakar (Senegal), in which a common African position was drafted.

These are just a few of the initiatives, whose developments are often contradictory, incomplete, or merely formal, but which account for a driving force advancing at a global level. In the sum of all these milestones and investigations—which propose a complex and interdisciplinary perspective—economic and material reparation (restitution of stolen objects), the recognition of crimes, formal apologies, and various mechanisms for access and the right to truth and justice are all at stake.

## A milestone: Napalpí Case

At the beginning of the 1970s, a team of researchers traveled to Chaco to conduct a situational study on the lives of the Chaco region’s Indigenous population. One of these researchers traveled to Colonia Aborigen, where the Napalpí Indian Reduction (Reducción de Indios de Napalpí) had operated until the mid-20th century. This researcher gathered various testimonies. The memory of the massacre reflected in his notes originated from members of the ruling classes and still carried a disciplinary tone. “The only good Indian is a dead Indian,” they told him. The type of memory installed by the State and the ruling classes since the time of the massacre was still in force.

Half a century later, in 2022, a Truth Trial (Juicio por la Verdad) was carried out in a Chaco federal court, in which more than fifty witnesses testified, including relatives of the victims as well as Indigenous and non-Indigenous experts and researchers. The trial concluded with a conviction against the State for the massacre and the ordering of a series of reparations, along with the creation of a Sentence Execution Unit tasked with monitoring the reparatory policies. The Napalpí Massacre was thus transformed into an exemplary case that demonstrated how an act of foundational violence managed to cross the threshold of centennial oblivion, utilizing a novel terrain and a format already tested in Argentina for the crimes of state terrorism during times of impunity: the Truth Trials.

How was the silence overcome in half a century, and how were the limits of the classic transitional justice model—built by human rights organizations to judge the crimes of the dictatorship—stretched? Which actors and conditions were fundamental, not only for the emergence of the memories of the communities themselves but for those memories to achieve reparation through the justice system?

In the first place, one must situate the re-emergence of an Indigenous narrative in the 1990s, coinciding with the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Spanish conquerors in the Caribbean islands. In Argentina, this impulse resulted in the incorporation of an article recognizing Indigenous populations in the 1994 Constitutional Reform. Simultaneously, the process of memory, truth, and justice was understood by the communities as an opportunity for the emergence of narratives regarding human rights violations suffered by Indigenous populations. This shifted the focus away from the traditional foundational event of the modern Argentine state—the military campaigns of southern occupation initiated in 1879—recognizing the importance of the advance of state dominance toward the Chaco as well, where a confrontation with the Qom and Moqoit populations took place in 1883 in a place they called Napalpí, consummating the Indigenous defeat and enabling the first experiences of state “reductions” in that territory.

This community initiative is largely exemplified by the political and intellectual trajectory of Juan Chico, a Qom teacher and historian who, in the 1990s as a very young man, began to recover the memories of the grandfathers and grandmothers of Colonia Aborigen. His impulse converged with the concerns of historians and anthropologists from the Universidad del Nordeste and other academic institutions, who began to think of the massacre as a unit of analysis rather than an isolated and silenced episode. [79](#footnote79) At the end of the 2000s and the beginning of the following decade, this search was incorporated, step by step, into the institutional policies of the Chaco State and, later, the National State.[80](#footnote80)

When Juan Chico managed to convince federal prosecutors in 2014 to initiate a request for a Truth Trial, there was already a transcendental accumulation of political work in memory reconstruction and research. [81](#footnote81) The creation of the Napalpí Foundation, under the direction of Juan Chico and other Indigenous leaders, their institutional participation in the National Institute of Indigenous Affairs (INAI), and the commitment of the Secretariats of Human Rights of the Nation and the Province of Chaco, provided sufficient support. More than anything, what influenced the outcome was the ability to convince the Indigenous community to involve itself in the claim to open the path of justice—an institution that had historically denied their history. Thus, the collective subject was constructed as both victim and plaintiff.

In this way, the breakthrough was driven by the memory of the descendants and, crucially, the political will to convert academic research (which had already proven the massacre) into judicial evidence. Qom and Moqoit communities preserved memory through generational oral transmission, ritual commemorations, and collective testimony that contradicted official negation. This “subterranean memory” (Pollak) circulated within communities despite—and because of—state denial. Anthropologists and historians began documenting these testimonies decades later, creating alternative archives. Academic research reconstructed the massacre through archival investigation, oral histories, and critical reading of official documents. This research produced juridical-quality evidence: testimonies, expert reports, and historical analysis demonstrating systematic violence and state responsibility.

The figure of the Truth Trial, by not seeking criminal convictions of individuals and not accusing any state authority or civilian actor in absentia, allowed for historical-legal recognition. The victims were represented by a state institution of direct Indigenous representation: the Instituto del Aborigen Chaqueño (IDACH). The formal accusation was handled by the federal prosecutor’s office. The Secretariat of Human Rights of Chaco was also admitted as a plaintiff. The National Secretariat of Human Rights committed its political support by designating the site as a Site of Memory (Sitio de Memoria) and presenting historical research and expert testimony. Thus, Napalpí demonstrates how Indigenous memory narratives (oral traditions, ceremonies) become the political resource to build a bridge toward justice, even at a 100-year distance.

A central point during the hearings was the projection by some actors to present arguments to incorporate the legal figure of genocide into a possible sentence. This was an objective that lacked unanimity, in the same sense that it historically sparked conflicts in classic trials for crimes against humanity. Ultimately, the prosecution did not charge for genocide. It requested the recognition of imprescriptibility via the concept of crimes against humanity and claimed convictions based on the penal code figures in force at the time of the events: treacherous murder (asesinato alevoso) and servitude. The judge recognized the legitimacy of the claim and convicted for crimes against humanity within the framework of a process of genocide. Following this, she took up the claims for reparation and ordered various measures, considering the sentence itself to be the first reparatory policy. Subsequently, the measures included historical memory preservation, monument construction, educational programs incorporating Indigenous perspectives, support for territorial claims, and infrastructure, health, and education programs for affected communities.

The ruling came 98 years after the massacre. While symbolically and juridically significant—validating community memory and establishing state responsibility—it cannot resurrect the dead or undo a century of dispossession. Contemporary challenges persist: Indigenous communities throughout Argentina face ongoing land dispossession, poverty, discrimination, and marginalization. The question remains whether this recognition contributes to transforming present conditions or primarily provides historical closure while structural violence continues. Indeed, although the message of the sentence was widely disseminated with great legitimacy through the media, there were voices that, for various reasons, rejected this judicial recognition.[82](#footnote82)

One reason for the rejection is related to another judicial process—older and of a civil nature—that was carried out in the same court regarding the Napalpí massacre and another committed in 1947 in the province of Formosa, further north, known as the Rincón Bomba Massacre of Pilagá communities.

Napalpí demonstrates that the threshold of memory is political, not merely temporal. The case crossed from denied event to recognized atrocity through sustained Indigenous organizing, academic translation of oral memory into juridical evidence, and favorable political-legal conditions. It establishes a precedent for prosecuting century-old violence as imprescriptible crimes against humanity. Yet it also reveals reparation’s paradox: acknowledging historical injustice while the structural conditions generating that injustice remain largely unchanged.

The Napalpí case exemplifies several dynamics central to understanding memory’s selectivity. The massacre remained “subterranean” for decades—known to affected communities but denied by official history. Its crossing into recognized atrocity required: (1) sustained Indigenous organizing transforming collective memory into political claim, (2) academic research translating oral testimony into documentary evidence, (3) juridical innovation applying the crimes against humanity framework to century-old violence, and (4) political will emerging from the broader human rights culture developed through dictatorship accountability processes.

Yet Napalpí also reveals troubling questions: why did this specific massacre cross the threshold while countless other instances of Indigenous violence remain unaddressed? The answer isn’t that Napalpí was “worse” than other violence but that specific organizational, juridical, and political conditions converged. This underscores the threshold’s fundamentally political character—not all violence, however severe, crosses into recognition and reparation.

## La tragedia del quebracho colorado

In 1965, Gastón Gori was commissioned to write a historical essay on the company that, two years prior, had closed its last tannin factory in the country and was then preparing to cease operations permanently. In just a few months, Gori scoured documents, press reports, and speeches to build a work that became iconic. In it, the Santa Fe writer not only denounced the logic of the British company’s operations—which had devastated millenary quebracho forests before relocating to Africa—but also recovered from oblivion the memories of the social struggles that had occurred four decades earlier and culminated in the massacre.

Gori rescued details of these events through journalistic chronicles and denunciations made in the provincial legislature, detailing the crimes committed by the company-funded militarized police and identifying the victims by name. Around the same time, Osvaldo Bayer would begin to reconstruct, in even greater detail, the struggles that took place in Patagonia.

Among the voices recovered by Gori were those of the Doldán brothers, local politicians who denounced La Forestal for its multiple outrages. He also recovered personal histories and a broader issue recently denounced by provincial deputy Anacarsis Acevedo: the exodus of the towns, given that the company had neither allowed nor facilitated an adequate productive reconversion. Indeed, while Gori’s essay gained enormous relevance in a historical context charged with revolutionary struggles and imaginaries, it was also steeped in nostalgia. Another great writer, Rodolfo Walsh—who had recently reconstructed the 1956 José León Suárez massacre—traveled north to describe the devastation left by the company; it was then that he spoke of the “ghost towns,” a stigma that settled over the former productive territories.

Shortly after the Cuban Revolution, within a political and social democracy besieged by military forces and economic powers, Gori’s narrative quickly reached the big screen through the film Quebracho. The film recovered the events of 1921 only at its beginning, focusing later on other displays of corporate violence, particularly the confrontation between the manager of the most important town and the popular Radical leader Rogelio Lamazón, murdered in 1940 amid an electoral contest by the company’s will. Other journalistic chronicles—very few—then recovered the history of a company that had exploited “slave labor,” devastated forests, and savagely repressed rebelling workers. During this time, the Crónica cantada de La Forestal by Oscar Ielpi became known, and some residents set out to reconstruct and transmit collective memories of a history for which they felt—not without reason—to be the last guardians: communist workers and participants in strikes and union reorganization experiences that had already been forgotten, such as those of the 1930s.

In parallel, former employees, executives, and the company itself narrated an official history: that of a true provider-father who brought “civilization” and productive life to a wild territory, organizing welfare societies. They sought to tell the “true” story of La Forestal and reject, as Luis Delfino explicitly stated, visions “altered by one political position or another.” The book with which the Buenos Aires-based Board of Directors sought to counter criticism of its relocation to another continent was titled: La Forestal, at the Service of Argentine Greatness.

By the 1970s and 80s, the subject entered academia and development institutes. From dependency theory perspectives, researchers sought to understand the extractive logic and social control policies, and to rethink productive perspectives following the company’s abrupt departure. The massacre, with its victims and perpetrators, was subsumed under a different kind of violence—one with systemic roots: the extractive, latifundist, and accumulative logic of capital.

Without that perspective disappearing, in the 1990s and especially at the turn of the new century, a viewpoint emerged from the towns themselves. They sought to reconstruct their histories, rethink themselves in light of their centennials, and reverse the migratory logic of their populations, particularly the younger generations. With a perspective of creating historical tourism projects and recovering cultural and architectural heritage as an economic activity, the “La Forestal” subject re-emerged. However, the binary logic regarding its legacy—exploitative and criminal versus civilizing and providing—was quickly recreated. In this context, the 1921 massacre was again brought to the fore. The book Revuelta obrera y masacre en La Forestal, featuring unprecedented official documentation, reopened a pending debate. In its wake, various literary reconstructions appeared, most of them situated in the context of the centennial massacre or making metaphorical allusions. In just five years, at least five novels set their sights on those events.

In 2021, for the first time in the history of the forest towns, official acts were organized to commemorate the centennial labor struggles. The Covid-19 pandemic did not stop the event. Talks, debates, video presentations, and the inauguration of cultural and historical spaces took place with significant media coverage and the intervention of multiple actors—from national and provincial officials and unions to academic institutions like CLACSO, intellectuals, teachers, and local students. The event was organized by a commission for the recovery of forest tradition and identity. Regional municipalities participated regardless of political identity. The governor and vice-governor of the province gave welcoming remarks during a live broadcast on provincial television.

In Villa Guillermina, a monument was erected to Teófilo Lafuente, the first general secretary of the tannin workers and a protagonist of those struggles. His grandchildren were present. The creation of a park for memory and identity was also announced. In Villa Ana, the opening of the 25th Quebracho Festival was used to unveil a mural projecting a photo taken in November 1920 in a logging camp (obraje) in La Gallareta, showing anarchist workers in struggle, displaying saddles, weapons, guitars, and violins. That festival night, however, one of the guest artists asked the audience for a round of applause in memory of the company that had provided so much work in its time. More recently, a group of explorers with metal detectors recovered hundreds of spent bullets in an area recognized by tradition as a site of combat between workers and the Gendarmería. Immediately, a heritage rescue commission was put into action under the policy of the provincial Ministry of Culture, based on the hypothesis of finding material remains of the massacre. Simultaneously, in the context of a far-right neoliberal government advancing an anti-union labor reform, the rejection of a “return to the times of La Forestal” resonates in some protests.

Despite the enormous accumulation of research and the reconstruction of memories of the massacre—similar to other cases like Napalpí or Patagonia—there has been no judicial translation of the case to date. Why? Should there be one? If so, who should promote it?

For now, we can observe that not all historical knowledge translates into juridical action, and not all violence becomes subject to accountability even when well-documented. Several dynamics explain this: in the case of La Forestal, the primary reason may be the lack of an organized group of victims/descendants mobilized around legal claims. Historical truth exists; juridical accountability does not. This reveals that the translation from knowledge to justice requires not only documentation but organized social actors with political will, legal expertise, and sustained commitment. Historical truth, however well-established, does not automatically generate accountability. This limitation is not a failure of academic research per se but a recognition that justice is a political process, not an automatic consequence of knowledge production. Research creates possibilities, but realizing those possibilities requires movements, not only scholars.

On the other hand, the current lack of an actor to mobilize social and political forces also inhibits literary narratives and memory work from translating into a stage of greater political confrontation. Something of this nature might have occurred when the national press spent several weeks covering the Peronist government’s initiative to expropriate the Vicentín company. Based in the same northern region of Santa Fe, Vicentín—despite its differences with La Forestal—evoked reminders of the latter, partly due to its power in the region and partly because it had also been denounced for its responsibility in the repression of workers during the dictatorship. However, this did not happen. The paths did not converge.

## Cien años de soledad

In 2025, for the first time in Colombia’s history, a sitting president participated in the commemoration of the Banana Massacre (Masacre de las Bananeras). Gustavo Petro, governing under the Pacto Histórico, traveled to Ciénaga, Magdalena, and announced a collective reparation plan that recognizes the labor union movement as a subject of reparation within the framework of the armed conflict. He also presented a bill to officially commemorate the 1928 massacre of workers committed by the U.S.-based United Fruit Co. (UFCo), ahead of its upcoming centennial. In his speech, Petro drew a line to the past with a sense of the present: “The United Fruit Company today is called Chiquita Brands, and it has continued to kill workers in Colombia,” he said. The president compared the 1928 victims to the thousands of banana workers murdered in Urabá between the 1980s and the early 21st century under “paramilitary governance.” The connection to the present is clear: during the commemoration, Petro and his Minister of Labor warned that labor violence persists. Recent inspections by the Ministry of Labor in the banana farms of Magdalena have found situations similar to those of a century ago: shifts exceeding 10 hours, with women earning half as much as men.[83](#footnote83)

To reach the present with such symbolic force, the historical journey of the massacre’s memory presents similarities to the case of La Forestal. Under specific circumstances, it was either forgotten or evoked in different ways, as collective memory articulated aspirations for justice and political practices within the working classes. Once the massacre was consummated, the company, conservative media, and the government portrayed workers as communist insurgents to justify military intervention. UFCo issued a communiqué celebrating the “revolutionary strike’s” resolution. The impacts of the massacre were strong enough to end Conservative rule after more than thirty years, amid the impact of the economic crisis. Liberal congressmen, particularly Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, denounced the massacre in Congress, though the ruling party blocked investigations.

Gaitán maintained agitation around the events, and his popularity and radicalism grew in subsequent years. Six months after the events, he traveled to the banana zone and gathered information, including testimonies from people who claimed to have been assaulted or who witnessed the army’s arbitraries. In Bogotá, the memory surfaced through street demonstrations and congressional debates. President Miguel Abadía Méndez presented a report on the previous year’s events in Ciénaga. General Cortés Vargas, for his part, published a justificatory memoir (1929), portraying military action as a legitimate defense against a communist revolution. However, Gaitán categorized the events as “crimes against the fatherland” committed by “ruthless and unmerciful men.” He also secured the passage of a law providing for the review of sentences handed down to those accused of participating in the strike and established financial compensation for the widows and children of the workers.[84](#footnote84)

One of the detained activists was Alberto Castrillón, a strike leader and member of the PSR, a party that made symbolic use of the events on their first anniversary. On December 6, 1929, he launched his presidential candidacy. In prison, Castrillón wrote a text relating his participation in the strike and the events following the massacre, thus seizing the political opportunity. These were not simply different perspectives on a shared event but battles over historical truth with concrete political stakes: whose version became official history, whose suffering was recognized, and who bore responsibility.

After 1930, the Liberal Party, now the governing force, felt the massacre no longer held the same symbolic weight it had during the fall of the Conservative Hegemony, leading to its gradual oblivion in that sector. The left, particularly the Communist Party, lacked the political capital to evoke it with greater intensity.[85](#footnote85)

In the early 1960s, the event leaped into fictional narrative. Álvaro Cepeda Samudio initiated a new period in banana literature in 1962 with his masterful work La casa grande. He was the first of a list of coastal novelists who reconstructed and reinterpreted the events. Experimenting with avant-garde narrative forms, he offered an original way to describe the violence and the impact of the strike. By blurring the idea of the conflict as a simple clash between workers and a foreign company, La casa grande placed the local bourgeoisie at the center of responsibility as the catalysts of the tragedy.[86](#footnote86)

Another novel describing the local bourgeoisie is Zig-zag en las bananeras (1964) by Efraín Tovar Mozo, which mentioned the figure of 3,000 deaths. Around that time, Gabriel García Márquez reconstructed the events in a novel that had a massive political impact, depicting yellow train cars full of corpses dumped into the sea. His fictional account in One Hundred Years of Solitude (iolen1967) ensured the massacre entered global consciousness as a symbol of corporate-state v ce. While his account—only one survivor believing what he witnessed while everyone else denies—exceeded documented facts, it captured the essential truth about scale and impunity. The novel’s worldwide circulation gave the massacre a recognition no historical account could achieve.[87](#footnote87)

At that time, within the context of the radicalization of social and political struggles in the 1960s and 1970s, the left became more heterogeneous and expanded its forms of communication and networks (both cultural and academic). This allowed the representation of the massacre to spread to urban and intellectual sectors, reaching beyond traditional unionism. In 1968, forty years after the event, communists once again turned to the memory of the massacre. In doing so, they revisited the idea of the “plague of insomnia” (peste del olvido), drawing a parallel with those who “today sow death, violence, and terror.” The previous twenty years had been lived under a state of siege, with numerous assassinations of union activists in events such as the 1963 Santa Bárbara massacre.[88](#footnote88) One of the protagonists of these struggles, Ignacio Torres Giraldo, provided a detailed narrative of both these contemporary conflicts and the historical banana strike.

In 1978, at the fiftieth anniversary of the massacre, the memory of the events re-emerged with great magnitude, demonstrating once again that evocation was conceived as a “duty of memory” articulated with a “duty of justice,” aimed at dynamicizing the political confrontations of the present. Workers reinforced their conceptions of the State and the elites as “murderers” and “repressors.” Consequently, various sectors of the left and the National Union Council—which gathered the four main labor federations—deployed efforts to organize the commemoration, giving rise to a unique event in the history of its evocation. As had never occurred before, the commemoration was nourished by dynamics such as the erection of monuments, public rallies, musical concerts, publications, and the staging of plays, such as Huelga de las Bananeras by Jaime Díaz and El Sol Subterráneo by Jairo Aníbal Niño. One reason for this was the transformation that had taken place within the Colombian left, which at that time consisted of a varied set of forces, including parties, movements, and guerrilla organizations. [89](#footnote89)

On that December 6, nearly fifteen thousand people attended, including locals, union activists, and regional and national militants from all left-wing organizations. The remembrance was connected to present circumstances, such as the Security Statute of the Julio César Turbay Ayala government (1978), demanding the lifting of the state of siege. This juncture served to stimulate the publication of research on the event. Three important texts appeared: Bananeras 1928-1978, prepared by a commission from the Center for Social Research (CEIS)—individuals linked to or close to the Communist Party who, despite not being professional historians, collected front-page documents and testimonies; Gabriel Fonnegra, a militant of the MOIR, published the book Bananeras, testimonio vivo de una epopeya in 1980; and in 1981, Carlos Arango, a journalist linked to the Communist Party, published Sobrevivientes de las bananeras, which gathered first-hand accounts. In Fonnegra’s case, he speaks of “silence as a political syndrome” protecting conservative interests—a silence that renders certain violence unspeakable, unmemorable, and unrepairable. This is not passive forgetting but active suppression: threatening those who speak, destroying evidence, monopolizing archival access, controlling educational curricula, and dominating media narratives. Memory struggles are not only about the past but about present power: those who control the historical narrative control political legitimacy. Extensive historical scholarship documented the massacre: Catherine LeGrand, Judith White, Marcelo Bucheli, and others reconstructed UFCo’s operations, labor relations, and state collaboration.

Access to historical research, however, brought conflicts with memory work and literary reconstruction, given that One Hundred Years of Solitude had a vast influence, even in school education. Authors such as Eduardo Posada Carbó criticized the creation of distortions in the historical truth, maintaining that the version in One Hundred Years of Solitude influenced how Colombians remember the event, sometimes displacing more careful historical reconstruction with literary imagining. The massacre gained universal recognition but perhaps at the cost of specificity and accountability. The aesthetic power that made the novel culturally successful may have limited its political utility for justice movements. [90](#footnote90) Fundamentally, the author rejects the victim count of 3,000 dead, starting from the confession of García Márquez himself, who stated that the real number must have been “quite small.” This did not imply denying the facts, as historical records evidence between 47 and 2,000 deaths and 600 detainees subjected to military justice, with 31 strikers sentenced to terms ranging from 2 to 25 years in prison (all released nine months later). Posada Carbó also sought to politicize the massacre by highlighting that these were not just workers in a labor conflict, but that the full activism of the Revolutionary Socialist Party was present with intentions of overthrowing the conservative government and establishing a revolutionary regime, concluding that the period was not a repressive and dictatorial one.

In recent decades, within the framework of the transitional justice process and official memory and truth policies, the event has been sustained to establish lines of continuity with the present being reviewed. When the eightieth anniversary was commemorated in 2008, the political context was marked by the second presidency of Álvaro Uribe Vélez and investigations into the links between multinationals (Chiquita Brands) and paramilitary groups (parapolítica). The campaign slogan was: “¿Tienes la memoria chiquita?” (Is your memory “Chiquita”/small?). The “appearance of continuity” of the event allowed human rights organizations to use the commemoration to fuel narratives about state persecution and to claim the necessity of policies for the defense of collective memory. Those events for the 80th anniversary were held in Ciénaga starting on December 1 and included multiple activities, notably religious acts, conferences, forums, book launches, musical performances, vigils, and pictorial and film exhibitions.[91](#footnote91) The acts concluded with a mobilization on December 6, attended by people from different parts of the country and journalists from news outlets such as Noticias Uno, Telesur, and Contravía, among others. [92](#footnote92) This was used as a means to resist the right-wing government’s insistence on approving the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) imposed by the United States, described as being “for the benefit of its multinationals that plunder national wealth, production, and labor.”

Parallel to this, new publications on the event—both academic and political—began to address the problem of memory and justice within the framework of historical continuity between the past and present.[93](#footnote93) Framing these events as crimes against humanity, as done by Archila Neira or Sánchez Ángel, is directly linked to the work of Colombia’s National Center for Historical Memory (CNMH) and the Truth Commission (CEV, 2018-2022), which comprehensively addressed corporate violence, including 1928. The CEV’s final report (2022) affirmed workers’ accounts, documented systematic UFCo-state collaboration, and analyzed how the banana industry exemplified corporate violence’s role in Colombia’s broader conflict.

At the 96th anniversary commemoration, thanks to the tenacity of a small core of “memory entrepreneurs” from Ciénaga (such as Agustín Lara, Gustavo Polo, and Edgardo Alemán), a turning point occurred, advancing the incipient institutionalization of the commemorative event and transforming it into a state matter. The reasons for this change include increased external attendance, a significant alliance between local foundations and the labor union Sintraunicol from Cali, the presence of officials from the new progressive national government, the proposal of new focuses—highlighting, for example, the leading role of women—and the need to break the systematic stigmatization of social organization.[94](#footnote94)

Nearly one hundred years after the events, local proposals exist that seek to transcend the threshold of memory and research to access integral reparation and justice. The presence of Petro and his announcements regarding the 100-year commemoration are transcendental. The December 6 Foundation (for Ciénaga society) and the Committee for the Reparation of the Labor Movement (CONARE) demand collective reparation. They do so with the political urgency of taking advantage of the current juncture. However, despite extensive documentation, cultural consecration, and truth commission recognition, significant dilemmas remain: how transcendental can official recognition be? Who is the subject of reparation? What role does the judicial arena play? To date, no criminal prosecution of UFCo or successor companies (United Brands, Chiquita) has occurred in Colombia. This is partly because UFCo liquidated and reformed multiple times, and Chiquita claims to be a different legal entity. Furthermore, in Colombia, the 1928 events predate the crimes against humanity doctrine; no legal framework for retroactive prosecution existed when transitional justice processes began in the 2000s-2020s.

# Where are historians?

Acá hay que agregar algo referido a la sociología laboral y la violencia y también a la historia.

“Human rights embody important values of universal relevance.” (“Research Handbook on Human Rights and Business”, 2020, p. 2)

“In fact, one can hardly do anything nowadays without some assistance or contribution on the part of corporations.” (“Research Handbook on Human Rights and Business”, 2020, p. 2)

## Conclusions

“In line with the larger thesis of this edited volume, this chapter also underlines that corporate accountability mainly results from the synergistic combination of mobilizations promoted and sustained by civil society and social movements.” (Bohoslavsky and Goñi, 2026, p. 182)

Sobre el rol de las empresas en el desarrollo del mundo actual: “Corporate social responsibility is an outgrowth of the current market mechanism as well as a countervailing force against it. Ultimately, corporations form an essential component of international economic development and continue to intensify their role within that global mandate. This is at once empowering and enriching for corporations, but it also forces them to engage with established governance and human rights frameworks, treaties, and laws. By assuming responsibilities to individuals and groups, corporations have the capacity to deliver returns as well as improve social conditions, but in the process inevitably attain enormous authority.” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. 20)

“While there is no foreseeable future where humans will cease their interactions with markets, there remains the question of how those who control markets will establish or maintain equitable returns to society as a result of economic expansion, and what the political corollaries of that will be.” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. 20) The proceeding chapters seek to answer this question by illustrating when and how human necessity and the free exercise of human rights can guide the market and when the market can shape the contours of human rights thought and practice and thereby define what a human rights victory is.

The effectiveness of corporate accountability in Latin America is fundamentally dictated by the legal classification of the crime, creating three distinct landscapes regarding the statute of limitations.

In Argentina, corporate complicity is increasingly framed within the doctrine of crimes against humanity, rendering cases against firms like Ford or Mercedes-Benz strictly imprescriptible as part of the state’s systematic repressive apparatus. In Brazil, the recent 2025 ruling against Volkswagen secured accountability through a different logic: identifying slave labor as an inherent violation of human dignity that, per Inter-American jurisprudence, remains imprescriptible regardless of the political regime in power. Conversely, the Chiquita Brands case in Colombia reveals a persistent institutional vulnerability; by prosecuting paramilitary financing as a standard 'criminal conspiracy' (concierto para delinquir) within the ordinary justice system, the proceedings remain subject to domestic expiration dates. This allows corporate actors to utilize lengthy appeals as a strategic tool for impunity—a loophole effectively closed by the human rights-based frameworks of the Argentine and Brazilian models.

The defining factor for the Colombian case is the temporal proximity of the crimes, as the financing of paramilitary groups occurred much more recently than the 20th-century dictatorships in the Southern Cone. This creates a critical legal tension: while the Argentine and Brazilian processes deal with historical memory and long-established doctrines of imprescriptibility, the Chiquita case is a race against a ticking clock. Because the events are relatively recent, corporate defendants can exploit the ordinary statute of limitations, turning judicial delays into a viable path toward impunity that is no longer available in the decades-old cases of Argentina or Brazil.

“While there is not a universal consensus as to final outcomes in terms of how much law is necessary to achieve accountability, the emphasis for the movement, and for policymakers, turns towards state commitments and the use, as needed, of binding laws as well as voluntary corporate measures.” (Ramasastry, 2015, p. 238)

“One important question to ask therefore, is if the actions of German or Japanese corporations during the Second World War occurred today, how would we respond? Moreover, to the extent that we would prosecute an individual for such crimes, why would we hesitate to similarly penalize the corporation for the same conduct?” (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 104)

Difference between criminal and civil law: Criminal liability may be more feasible than civil litigation, given the need for a proper statute conferring jurisdiction in the civil context. Moreover, since criminal prosecution requires a much higher burden of proof than civil cases, states would have to satisfy a higher evidentiary threshold. Finally, criminal sanctions for egregious violations of international law may have a greater deterrent effect than civil lawsuits. Paying a civil fine is much less stigmatizing than a criminal conviction and penalty. “penalty” (Ramasastry, 2002, p. 153)

“But when it comes to plotting, and tracking, and assessing, and criticizing, and debating, and repairing, actual remedies, including long, real histories of institutions of intervention and their successes and failures, the lawyers know things the ethnographers only dream about, in the calls for state and legal intervention and their actual prospects and consequences.” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. xiv)

“So can codes of corporate social responsibility work?” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. xiv) “Can corporations, the infamous joint stock companies of predatory, neocolonial, and globalizing capitalism, the famous engines of prosperity that we all require to do their work well—can corporations become the vehicle not for the undermining of state protections of society but rather for the extension, definition, and development of regimes of human rights in practice?” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. xiv)

“We have to get the scholarship out of the siloes and into conversations like this, to make the works of science and scholarship more relevant in real time, to actual political questions for our age.” (Walker-Said and Kelly, 2015, p. xiv) (Kelly, 2015)

“Leanne Simpson defines reconciliation as the act of restoring harmony; rather than dwelling on the tattered past for the grievances it provides, we may be better suited to forge a better future (2017: 21-22)”(Oliveira, 2021, p. 4)

“She points out a need to revitalize native culture and native ways of life by reaffirming the culture, practices and traditions that have lost their values today through constant marginalization.” “The three examples presented and discussed in this article seek to examine the resurgence of Indigenous cultures. Each of the case studies illustrates how communities and even some levels of the courts find ways to exert influence on other nations to take the lead towards achieving reconciliation.”

1 Brasil: Relatório denuncia elo entre pecuária, trabalho forçado e desmatamento antes da COP30; inclui respostas das empresas, in [www.business-humanrights.org](https://www.business-humanrights.org/), October 9th, 2025.

2 Mais de 2 mil pessoas foram resgatadas de condição análoga à escravidão em 2024; Minas Gerais lidera ranking, in [www.brasildefato.com.br](http://www.brasildefato.com.br), January 28th, 2025.

3 MinTrabajo selló tres buques de atún Van Camps: tripulaciones extranjeras sin contrato y condiciones “indignas” in <https://www.elcolombiano.com>, October 11th, 2025.

4 “La Policía Federal Argentina rescató a 21 personas víctimas de trabajo esclavo”, ver en: <https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/la-policia-federal-argentina-rescato-21-personas-victimas-de-trabajo-esclavo>

5 Jóvenes indígenas exigen Comisión de la Verdad para investigar los crímenes del caucho en Perú, in [www.infobae.com](http://www.infobae.com), October 15th 2025.

6 Wettstein talks about two ways criticism: from those who aimed at CSR’s lack of effectiveness, which he calls “hot air” criticism, and from those who claim because of smokescreen strategies aiming to misguide well intentioned attempts while continuing business as usual, which he calls “Trojan horse” critics.

7 For instance, the Nigerian activist Ken Saro-Wiwa spearheaded large-scale protests against the massive destruction of the environment in Nigeria’s Niger Delta and the erosion of the livelihoods of tens of thousands of local Ogoni people by Western oil companies since the 1970s., altought his excecution happened in the ninetees, being considered the trigger of BHR global movement.

8 Upendra Baxi’s early writing on the Bhopal disaster and Tom Donaldson’s seminal Ethics of International Business.

9 Countries such as Colombia, the United States, and Chile have already approved and published their respective plans, while others (Argentina, Brazil, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Peru) are currently in the process of doing so.

10 The EU has published two regulations that establish obligations for companies, especially multinationals, aimed at ensuring that their activity is respectful of human rights: Regulation 2017/821 on the export of minerals from conflict-affected areas and Directive 2014/95 on non-financial information. Both adress positive obligations of companies toward human rights and are stems largely from the UNGP, which as was stated above, the EU adopted through the Renewed EU Strategy 2011-2014 on CSR and the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy approved in 2012.

11 El listado es bastante extenso, entre los fallos adversos, como el sobreseimiento de un directivo del diario La Nueva Provincia o el más reciente de Acindar, las demoras, como el del Ingenio Ledesma (donde se mantiene un civil imputado), Dálmine-Siderca de Techint, Mercedes Benz, Grafa y Grafanor, Astarsa y Mestrina, que llevan al fallecimiento de empresarios, como los dueños de Ledesma o Las Marías. Recientemente, en febrero de 2026, se anunció apertura del juicio tan demorado contra ex diretivos del ingenio La Fronterita de Tucumán.

12 Judith Schrempf-Stirling et al., «Historic corporate social responsibility», Academy of Management Review 41, n.o 4 (2016): 700-719.

13 Pedro Henrique Pedreira Campos et al., eds., Empresariado e ditadura no Brasil (Consequência, 2020).

14 Almeida de Carvalho Silva, A Volkswagen é a Ditadura. A fábrica de violência da multinacional alemã no Brasil durante o regime civil-militar brasileiro; Marcelo Almeida de Carvalho Silva, «As Práticas de Normalização da Violência Operacionalizadas pela Volkswagen do Brasil na Ditadura Militar Brasileira (1964-1985)» (Tesis de Doctorado en Administración de Empresas, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Administração de Empresas do Departamento de Administração da PUC-Rio, 2018).

15 José De Souza-Martins, «A reprodução do capital na frente pioneira e o renascimento da escravidão no Brasil», Tempo Social 6, n.o 1-2 (1994): 1-25, https://doi.org/10.1590/ts.v6i1/2.84955; Tiago Muniz Cavalcanti y Rafael Garcia Rodrigues, «Trabalho escravo contemporâneo: hoje, o mesmo de ontem», Veredas do Direito 20 (2023): e202203.

16 Benjamin Buclet, «Entre tecnologia e escravidão: a aventura da Volkswagen na Amazônia», O Social em Questão 13 (2005): 5.

17 Alessandra Gasparotto et al., «Responsabilidad empresarial por violaciones de derechos humanos contra poblaciones rurales durante la dictadura cívico-militar en Brasil (1964-1985): ¿Qué nos enseña el caso de la empresa Josapar?», Revista Austral de Ciencias Sociales, n.o Especial (octubre de 2025): 177-98, https://doi.org/10.4206/rev.austral.cienc.soc.2025.ne-09.

18 Alessandra Gasparotto et al., «Responsabilidad empresarial por violaciones de derechos humanos contra poblaciones rurales durante la dictadura cívico-militar en Brasil (1964-1985): ¿Qué nos enseña el caso de la empresa Josapar?», Revista Austral de Ciencias Sociales, n.o Especial (octubre de 2025): 177-98, https://doi.org/10.4206/rev.austral.cienc.soc.2025.ne-09.

19 Terrence McCoy y Marina Dias, «The horrors of Volkswagen’s ranch were forgotten. Then a priest made a call», The Washington Post (Washington DC), 23 de julio de 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2025/brazil-volkswagen-ranch-amazon/.

20 Ver relatos e imágenes: <https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2025/brazil-volkswagen-ranch-amazon/> y <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2023/mar/30/brazil-to-sue-volkswagen-over-claims-of-slavery-during-military-dictatorship> y <https://reporterbrasil.org.br/2025/05/why-is-volkswagen-accused-of-slave-labor-in-the-amazon/> y <https://reporterbrasil.org.br/2025/12/trabalhadores-processam-volkswagen-escravidao-fazenda-ditadura/>

21 In 1991, she inaugurated the first monument to forced laborers and a special edition of “60 Minutes.” In 1998, class action lawsuits were filed in the United States against her and other companies. The humanitarian fund then reached 20 million marks. In 1999, the corporate archives were established and the “Place of Remembrance” was opened. In 2000, the association “Remedium, Responsibility and Future” was founded. In 2006, sections on remembrance were included in the CSR reports. In 2009, educational programs for managers were launched at the Auschwitz memorial.Claudia I. Janssen, «Corporate Historical Responsibility (CHR): Addressing a Corporate Past of Forced Labor at Volkswagen», Journal of Applied Communication Research 41, n.o 1 (2013): 64-83, https://doi.org/10.1080/00909882.2012.731698.

22 La transición de Brasil (1979-1985) fue gradual, negociada entre élites militares y civiles, produciendo una ley de amnistía (1979) que los militares insisten permanece válida.

23 Kathryn Sikkink, La Cascada de La Justicia: Cómo Los Juicios de Lesa Humanidad Están Cambiando El Mundo de La Política, trad. María Natalia Prunes (Editorial Gedisa, 2016), 98.

24 Leigh A. Payne et al., Transitional justice and corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes’ lever (Cambridge University Press, 2020), 16.

25 Larissa Rosa Correa y Paulo Roberto Ribeiro Fontes, «”As falas de Jerônimo”: Trabalhadores, sindicatos e a historiografia da ditadura militar brasileira», Anos 90 23, n.o 43 (2016), https://doi.org/10.22456/1983-201X.60849.

26 Alessandra Gasparotto et al., «Responsabilidad empresarial por violaciones de derechos humanos contra poblaciones rurales durante la dictadura cívico-militar en Brasil (1964-1985): ¿Qué nos enseña el caso de la empresa Josapar?», Revista Austral de Ciencias Sociales, n.o Especial (octubre de 2025): 177-98, https://doi.org/10.4206/rev.austral.cienc.soc.2025.ne-09.

27 Central Única dos Trabalhadores, O golpe militar contra os trabalhadores e as trabalhadoras. Sindicalistas mortos e desaparecidos durante a ditadura militar e transição civil no Brasil: 1964-1988. (Central Única dos Trabalhadores - Comissao Ncaional da Memoria, Verdade e Justica, 2015).

28 Ver trabajo de Rosa Maria Cardoso da Cunha Antonio José Marques et al., Trabajadores, archivos, memoria, verdad, justicia y reparación (Ministerio da Justiça e cidadania, Arquivo Nacional, Central Única dos Trabalhadores, 2018); Alejandra Estevez y San Romanelli Assumpçao, «Ditadura E Repressao Contra a Classe Trabalhadora», Revista Anistia. Política e justica de transicao 10 (julio de 2013): 707; Alejandro Jasinski, «Para hablar sobre violencia empresarial. Terrorismo estatal y empresas en Argentina: un diálogo con Brasil», en Más allá de “transiciones” y de “pérdidas”. Los ochenta en América Latina, Alejandro Schneider (Comp.) (Imago Mundi, 2018).

29 Comissáo Nacional da Verdade, Comissáo Nacional da Verdade. Relatório. Textos temáticos, vol. 2 (Comissão Nacional da Verdade, 2014).

30 El IPES, presentado como una sociedad civil sin fines de lucro, funcionó en realidad como un centro conspiratorio donde se articularon empresarios, tecnoempresarios, políticos conservadores y altos mandos militares.

31 Antonio José Marques et al., Trabajadores, archivos, memoria, verdad, justicia y reparación (Ministerio da Justiça e cidadania, Arquivo Nacional, Central Única dos Trabalhadores, 2018), 98.

32 Guaracy Mingardi, ed., A participação da indústria paulista na repressão política: o caso Volkswagen. Relatório Final, with Martin Carone Dos Santos (Sao Paulo, 2017). Authorities commissioned political scientist Guaracy Mingardi and criminal lawyer Martin Carone dos Santos to collect evidence, documents, and testimonies to support any claims

33 Eduardo Saad-Diniz, «Justiça de Transição Corporativa: a nova geração de estudos transicionais», Revista Brasileira de Ciências Criminais-RBCCrim 167, n.o 28 (2020): 71-128; Christopher Kopper, A VW do Brasil durante a Ditadura Militar brasileira 1964-1985 (Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft, 2017).

34 de una determinada organización en el tiempo; (2) para su uso como instrumento para impugnar versiones oficiales de historias corporativas sobre actos y eventos pasados; y (3) para la comprensión de las organizaciones como comunidades políticas cuyo sentido de comunidad (sensus communis) puede ayudar a comprender tanto la permanencia (intencional o no) de ciertas características organizacionales en el tiempo como el intercambio de ideas y propósitos entre sus miembros que guían, al mismo tiempo, un curso de acción individual y responsabilidad colectiva..","container-title":"REAd. Revista Eletrônica de Administração (Porto Alegre)","DOI":"10.1590/1413-2311.340.114505","ISSN":"1413-2311, 1980-4164","issue":"1","journalAbbreviation":"REAd. Rev. eletrôn. adm. (Porto Alegre)","language":"pt","license":"http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/","page":"154-179","source":"DOI.org (Crossref)","title":"A responsabilidade política corporativa por atos de violencia no passado: a colaboracao da Volkswagen do Brasil com a ditadura civil-militar brasilera","title-short":"A RESPONSABILIDADE POLÍTICA CORPORATIVA POR ATOS DE VIOLÊNCIA NO PASSADO","volume":"28","author":\[{"family":"Almeida de Carvalho Silva","given":"Marcelo Almeida De Carvalho"},{"family":"Da Costa","given":"Alessandra De Sá Mello"},{"family":"Santos","given":"Cynthia Adrielle Da Silva"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2022",1\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} Marcelo Almeida De Carvalho Almeida de Carvalho Silva et al., «A responsabilidade política corporativa por atos de violencia no passado: a colaboracao da Volkswagen do Brasil com a ditadura civil-militar brasilera», REAd. Revista Eletrônica de Administração (Porto Alegre) 28, n.o 1 (2022): 154-79, https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-2311.340.114505.

35 Ministério Público Federal em São Paulo et al., Direitos humanos, empresas e justiça de transição: o papel da Volkswagen do brasil na repressão política durante a ditadura militar. Relatório conjunto (Sao Paulo, 2020).

36 Marcelo Almeida De Carvalho Almeida de Carvalho Silva et al., «A responsabilidade política corporativa por atos de violencia no passado: a colaboracao da Volkswagen do Brasil com a ditadura civil-militar brasilera», REAd. Revista Eletrônica de Administração (Porto Alegre) 28, n.o 1 (2022): 154-79, https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-2311.340.114505.

37 El CAAF publicó una convocatoria de investigadores para que desarrollaran proyectos sobre diez empresas, resultando 13 las investigadas. Edson Teles et al., A responsabilidade de empresas por violações de direitos durante a ditadura. Informe Público (Universidade Federal de São Paulo – Unifesp Pró-Reitoria de Extensão e Cultura – Proec Centro de Antropologia e Arqueologia Forense CAAF/Unifesp, 2023).

38 Ricardo Rezende Figueira y Rafael Garcia Rodrigues, «A Volkswagen, as relações com o poder e a escravidão no Brasil», en Direitos humanos no Brasil 2022, de Rede Social de Justiça e Direitos Humanos (Outras Expressoes, 2022).

39 Terrence McCoy y Marina Dias, «The horrors of Volkswagen’s ranch were forgotten. Then a priest made a call», The Washington Post (Washington DC), 23 de julio de 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2025/brazil-volkswagen-ranch-amazon/. This newspaper article depicts very well the challenge for victims and acussators. Nevertheless, the reconstruction I made is based in personal conversation with Rezende Figueira.

40 Terrence McCoy y Marina Dias, «The horrors of Volkswagen’s ranch were forgotten. Then a priest made a call», The Washington Post (Washington DC), 23 de julio de 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2025/brazil-volkswagen-ranch-amazon/.

41 "Buclet","given":"Benjamin"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2005"\]\]}}},{"id":26753,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/Z7C98QSH"\],"itemData":{"id":26753,"type":"book","ISBN":"65-87631-45-2","publisher":"Mauad Editora Ltda","title":"A escravidão na Amazônia: quatro décadas de depoimentos de fugitivos e libertos","URL":"https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=pZxEEAAAQBAJ\&pg=GBS.PA1\&hl=en\_GB","author":\[{"family":"Figueira","given":"Ricardo Rezende"},{"family":"Prado","given":"Adonia Antunes"},{"family":"Palmeira","given":"Rafael Franca"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2021"\]\]}}},{"id":27208,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/NYYZAVR9"\],"itemData":{"id":27208,"type":"article-journal","container-title":"Inter. Mob. Hum","language":"pt","page":"175-193","source":"Zotero","title":"Ele nao chega nunca... Experiências de mulheres no contexto do trabalho escravo","volume":"37","author":\[{"family":"Figueira","given":"Ricardo Rezende"},{"family":"Prado","given":"Adonia Antunes"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2011"\]\]}}},{"id":26728,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/X5TFVBW7"\],"itemData":{"id":26728,"type":"book","title":"Pisando fora da própria sombra: a escravidão por dívida no Brasil contemporâneo","URL":"https://archive.org/details/pisandoforadapro0000figu/page/n1/mode/2up","author":\[{"family":"Figueira","given":"Ricardo Rezende"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2004"\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} Benjamin Buclet, «Entre tecnologia e escravidão: a aventura da Volkswagen na Amazônia», O Social em Questão 13 (2005): 5; Ricardo Rezende Figueira et al., A escravidão na Amazônia: quatro décadas de depoimentos de fugitivos e libertos (Mauad Editora Ltda, 2021), Rezende Figueira y Adonia Antunes Prado, «Ele nao chega nunca... Experiências de mulheres no contexto do trabalho escravo», Inter. Mob. Hum 37 (2011): 175-93; Ricardo Rezende Figueira, Pisando fora da própria sombra: a escravidão por dívida no Brasil contemporâneo (1954).

42 Ricardo Rezende Figueira y Rafael Garcia Rodrigues, «A Volkswagen, as relações com o poder e a escravidão no Brasil», en Direitos humanos no Brasil 2022, de Rede Social de Justiça e Direitos Humanos (Outras Expressoes, 2022), 87.

43 Ricardo Rezende Figueira y Rafael Garcia Rodrigues, «A Volkswagen, as relações com o poder e a escravidão no Brasil», en Direitos humanos no Brasil 2022, de Rede Social de Justiça e Direitos Humanos (Outras Expressoes, 2022), 92.

44 The Post also interviewed 29 people with knowledge of the Volkswagen ranch — 16 worked on the property and nine alleged they had been enslaved.Terrence McCoy y Marina Dias, «The horrors of Volkswagen’s ranch were forgotten. Then a priest made a call», The Washington Post (Washington DC), 23 de julio de 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2025/brazil-volkswagen-ranch-amazon/.

45 Diego Junqueira, «Trabalhadores processam Volkswagen por escravidão em fazenda na ditadura», reporterbrasil.org.br, Diciembre de de 2025, https://reporterbrasil.org.br/2025/12/trabalhadores-processam-volkswagen-escravidao-fazenda-ditadura/.

46 The labor movement promoted the use of “truth trials,” which allowed for the collection of evidence and sought admissions of guilt and collective reparations from companies like Volkswagen and Fiat. Specifically, the Workers’ Forum for Truth, Justice, and Reparation was created, producing events, debates, and measures to hold companies accountable.

47 Diego Junqueira, «Trabalhadores processam Volkswagen por escravidão em fazenda na ditadura», reporterbrasil.org.br, Diciembre de de 2025, https://reporterbrasil.org.br/2025/12/trabalhadores-processam-volkswagen-escravidao-fazenda-ditadura/.

48 La ley de quema, Ley no 7.627 de 1987, implica lesionar el derecho a la prueba de los ciudadanos, ya que los autos podían servir como prueba de tiempo de servicio, jubilación o trabajo insalubre en futuros litigios, además de contener poderosa información para reconstruir las relaciones laborales. Antonio José Marques et al., Trabajadores, archivos, memoria, verdad, justicia y reparación (Ministerio da Justiça e cidadania, Arquivo Nacional, Central Única dos Trabalhadores, 2018).

49 Carla Machado Lopes y Tatiani Carmona Regos, eds., Arquivo e memória dos trabalhadores da cidade e do campo, vol. 2, Coleção: Arquivos e o direito à memória e à verdade. Comunicações do 3o Seminário Internacional o Mundo dos Trabalhadores e seus Arquivos (Arquivo Nacional, Ministério da Justica y Central Única dos Trabalhadores, 2015).

50 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

51 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

52 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

53 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

54 DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), 41, https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf.

55 DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf.

56 Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, Hallazgos y recomendaciones de la Comisión de la Verdad de Colombia, Primera edición, Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición 1 (Comisión de la Verdad, 2022), 2:301.

57 Andrés Fernando Suárez et al., eds., ¡Basta ya\! Colombia: memorias de guerra y dignidad: informe general, Primera edición en Colombia, julio de 2013 (Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica Departamento para la Prosperidad Social, 2013).

58 Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, Convocatoria a la paz grande: declaración de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, Primera edición, Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición 1 (Comisión de la Verdad, 2022), 1:31.

59 Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, No Matarás. Relato histórico del conflicto armado interno en Colombia, Primera edición, vol. 3, Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición 1 (Comisión de la Verdad, 2022); Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, Hallazgos y recomendaciones de la Comisión de la Verdad de Colombia, Primera edición, vol. 2, Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición 1 (Comisión de la Verdad, 2022).

60 DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), 64, https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf; Global Iniciative For Justice, Truth and Reconciliation, Roles y responsabilidades del sector privado en procesos de justicia transicional. Los casos de Colombia, Guatemala y Argentina (2021).

61 DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf; Leigh A. Payne et al., Transitional justice and corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes’ lever (Cambridge University Press, 2020).

62 Global Iniciative For Justice, Truth and Reconciliation, Roles y responsabilidades del sector privado en procesos de justicia transicional. Los casos de Colombia, Guatemala y Argentina (2021), 38.

63 Ver nota en el sitio web de la empresa: <https://drummondltd.com/en/u-s-federal-court-rules-in-drummonds-favor-and-rejects-false-accusations/> and <https://thecitypaperbogota.com/business/federal-jury-awards-drummond-us256-million-in-colombia-defamation-case/>

64 DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf; Global Iniciative For Justice, Truth and Reconciliation, Roles y responsabilidades del sector privado en procesos de justicia transicional. Los casos de Colombia, Guatemala y Argentina (2021).

65 Specifically, the Colombian Federation of Livestock Farmers (FEDEGAN) published two books in 2013, We Weren’t Born Yesterday: Livestock Institutionality 1900–1990 and Ending Oblivion, aimed at reconstructing the memory of cattle ranching and lobbying institutions, while commemorating victims within the sector—a sector accused by activists and in paramilitary statements of supporting paramilitary creation and activity. Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381; Leigh A. Payne et al., Transitional justice and corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes’ lever (Cambridge University Press, 2020); DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018), https://www.dejusticia.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cuentas-Claras.pdf.

66 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

67 les. This essay also analyzes how the 2016 accord between the Colombian government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) aims to address the causes of the conﬂict so as to establish a durable peace with justice. The essay then looks at the challenges ahead for the implementation of the agreement. Issues of rural inequality, displacement, impunity, the illegal drug economy, the military, private armed groups, new social demands, innovative memory projects, and the changing role of the state are discussed. The bibliography provides a guide to some of the best Colombian literature on the armed conﬂict, its impact, and possible outcomes of the peace process.","container-title":"Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue canadienne des études latino-américaines et caraïbes","DOI":"10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381","ISSN":"0826-3663, 2333-1461","issue":"3","journalAbbreviation":"Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue canadienne des études latino-américaines et caraïbes","language":"en","page":"259-276","source":"DOI.org (Crossref)","title":"Land, justice, and memory: challenges for peace in Colombia","title-short":"Land, justice, and memory","volume":"42","author":\[{"family":"LeGrand","given":"Catherine C."},{"family":"Van Isschot","given":"Luis"},{"family":"Riaño-Alcalá","given":"Pilar"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2017",9,2\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica y Organización Nacional Indígena de Colombia, Tiempos de vida y muerte: memorias y luchas de los Pueblos Indígenas en Colombia (CNMH-ONIC, 2019); Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381.

68 corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes' lever","author":\[{"family":"Payne","given":"Leigh A."},{"family":"Pereira","given":"Gabriel"},{"family":"Bernal-Bermúdez","given":"Laura"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2020"\]\]}}},{"id":24004,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/P3S3E4CK"\],"itemData":{"id":24004,"type":"book","collection-number":"1","collection-title":"Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición","edition":"Primera edición","ISBN":"978-958-53874-4-7","language":"es","number-of-volumes":"24","publisher":"Comisión de la Verdad","publisher-place":"Bogotá","source":"K10plus ISBN","title":"Hallazgos y recomendaciones de la Comisión de la Verdad de Colombia","title-short":"Convocatoria a la paz grande","volume":"2","author":\[{"literal":"Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2022"\]\]}},"locator":"259","label":"page"},{"id":27204,"uris":\["http://zotero.org/users/3645401/items/7L6SBRIH"\],"itemData":{"id":27204,"type":"article-journal","container-title":"Revista Latinoamericana de Administración","issue":"43","language":"es","page":"174-181","source":"Zotero","title":"Chiquita en Colombia","author":\[{"family":"Bunse","given":"Simone"},{"family":"Colburn","given":"Forrest"}\],"issued":{"date-parts":\[\["2009"\]\]}}}\],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} Leigh A. Payne et al., Transitional justice and corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes’ lever (Cambridge University Press, 2020); Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición, Hallazgos y recomendaciones de la Comisión de la Verdad de Colombia, Primera edición, Hay futuro si hay verdad: Informe Final de la Comisión para el Esclarecimiento de la Verdad, la Convivencia y la No Repetición 1 (Comisión de la Verdad, 2022), 2:259; Simone Bunse y Forrest Colburn, «Chiquita en Colombia», Revista Latinoamericana de Administración, n.o 43 (2009): 174-81.

69 Leigh A. Payne et al., Transitional justice and corporate accountability from below: Deploying Archimedes’ lever (Cambridge University Press, 2020), 250; DeJusticia, Cuentas Claras. El papel de la Comisión de la Verdad en la develación de la responsabilidad de empresas en el conflicto armado colombiano (Antropo, 2018).

70 This legal framework allows to take the case before federal court despite it was rejected this claim under anti-terroritst statute.

71 Simone Bunse y Forrest Colburn, «Chiquita en Colombia», Revista Latinoamericana de Administración, n.o 43 (2009): 174-81.

72 Schrempf-Stirling et al., «Historic corporate social responsibility».

73 “Chiquita Held Liable for Deaths During Colombian Civil War”, New York Times, 11 de junio de 2024; “Florida Jury Finds Chiquita Brands Liable for Colombia Deaths, Must Pay $38.3M to Family Members”, International Center for Transitional Justice, 18 de junio de 2024

74 Dado que se demostró que la compañía efectivamente financió a las AUC, lo que resta para los otros casos es demostrar que sus familiares fueron asesinados por las fuerzas paramilitares.

75 “Colombia: condenan a exdirectivos de la bananera Chiquita Brands por financiar a paramilitares”, Página 12, 24 de julio de 2025; “Chiquita Republic: el juicio histórico contra bananeros por financiación del paramilitarismo”, Vorágine, 17 de febrero de 2025; “Directivos de Chiquita Brands: condenados por financiar paramilitares”, Vorágine, 23 de julio de 2025.

76 <https://verdadabierta.com/condena-a-directivos-de-chiquita-brands-entre-el-riesgo-a-la-prescripcion-y-la-oportunidad-de-verdad/> y <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9oD14yEGqY>

77 <https://earthrights.org/case/doe-v-chiquita-brands-international-es/> y <https://www.business-humanrights.org/en/latest-news/chiquita-found-guilty-of-funding-colombian-paramilitary-group/> . Here, is the case of Victoria Mesa-Estrada es una abogada colombiana-estadounidense que forma parte del bufete Searcy Denney Scarola Barnhart & Shipley. Victoria Mesa-Estrada es abogada por St. Thomas University School of Law, donde también obtuvo un LL.M en Derechos Humanos Interculturales. Victoria trabaja en la firma de abogados Searcy Law y fue parte del equipo de defensa de las víctimas de este caso. Ver: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YRwbJXi0Io>

78 <https://forjandofuturos.org/los-73-predios-de-chiquita-brands-que-estan-en-zona-estrategica-de-puerto-antioquia/>

79 referirse a la trayectoria del tema desde los estudios antropológicos de la segunda mitad del siglo XX

80 Mencionar la política oficial de Chaco: reconocimiento de Capitanich en 2008.

81 El trabajo publicado por Juan Chico y Mario Fernández.

82 Profundizar en los casos de quienes se pronunciaron en contra del juicio.

83 Alejandro Jasinski, “La violencia corporativa, las bananas y Milei”, en [www.elDiarioar.com](http://www.elDiarioar.com), 12 de diciembre de 2025.

84 José Abelardo Díaz Jaramillo, «Los trabajos de la memoria: la masacre de las bananeras y los sectores subalternos en Colombia, 1929-2008», Trashumante. Revista Americana de Historia Social, n.o 13 (enero de 2019): 30-54, https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.trahs.n13a02.

85 José Abelardo Díaz Jaramillo, «Los trabajos de la memoria: la masacre de las bananeras y los sectores subalternos en Colombia, 1929-2008», Trashumante. Revista Americana de Historia Social, n.o 13 (enero de 2019): 30-54, https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.trahs.n13a02

86 Nicolás Pernett, «La masacre de las bananeras en la literatura colombiana», en Bananeras: huelga y masacre 80 años (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Derecho, Ciencias …, 2009).

87 Nicolás Pernett, «La masacre de las bananeras en la literatura colombiana», en Bananeras: huelga y masacre 80 años (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Derecho, Ciencias …, 2009); José Abelardo Díaz Jaramillo, «Los trabajos de la memoria: la masacre de las bananeras y los sectores subalternos en Colombia, 1929-2008», Trashumante. Revista Americana de Historia Social, n.o 13 (enero de 2019): 30-54, https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.trahs.n13a02.

88 Germán Andrés Jáuregui González, «La huelga de los trabajadores de cementos El Cairo y la masacre de Santa Bárbara (Colombia)», en Masacres obreras y populares en América Latina durante el siglo XX, de Sergio Grez Toso y Jorge Elías Caro (Imago Mundi, 2021).

89 José Abelardo Díaz Jaramillo, «Los trabajos de la memoria: la masacre de las bananeras y los sectores subalternos en Colombia, 1929-2008», Trashumante. Revista Americana de Historia Social, n.o 13 (enero de 2019): 30-54, https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.trahs.n13a02.

90 Eduardo Posadas Carbó, «La novela como historia. Cien años de soledad y las bananeras», Boletín Cultural y Bibliográfico 35 (1998). Posada Carbó cuestiona la aceptación de la novela Cien años de soledad de Gabriel García Márquez como una fuente histórica fidedigna de los acontecimientos, criticando fundamentalmente la idea del impacto económico y social de la United Fruit Company (UFCo) en la región, la naturaleza represiva del régimen y de la misma huelga y la supuesta “conspiración del silencio” que siguió a la huelga para borrar la verdad de la historia nacional.

91 See images: <https://www6.rel-uita.org/sectores/banano/80_anios_masacre.htm>

92 José Abelardo Díaz Jaramillo, «Los trabajos de la memoria: la masacre de las bananeras y los sectores subalternos en Colombia, 1929-2008», Trashumante. Revista Americana de Historia Social, n.o 13 (enero de 2019): 30-54, https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.trahs.n13a02; Mauricio Archila Neira y Leidy Jazmín Torres Centales, eds., Bananeras: huelga y masacre 80 años (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Derecho, Ciencias …, 2009).

93 Catherine C. LeGrand et al., «Land, Justice, and Memory: Challenges for Peace in Colombia», Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revue Canadienne Des Études Latino-Américaines et Caraïbes 42, n.o 3 (2017): 259-76, https://doi.org/10.1080/08263663.2017.1378381; Aviva Chomsky, «Globalización, trabajo y violencia en la zona bananera de Colombia», Revista Controversia, n.o 219 (2022): 283-331; Mauricio Archila Neira y Leidy Jazmín Torres Centales, eds., Bananeras: huelga y masacre 80 años (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Derecho, Ciencias …, 2009).

94 Noémi Fablet, «El 96 aniversario de la masacre de las bananeras: retour de terrain», Billets du collectif, EHESS, 2025, https://franchise.hypotheses.org/6514.
